# The Court-Martial

Witht the Eurydice all but recovered, and there having been opportunity to inspect the inside of the wreck as she was beached of Sandown Bay and then St Helens, the court-martial and the attendant investigation into the original disaster could now take place.

The court martial was held on board the Duke of Wellington flagship, in Portsmouth

The court began with a statement from, and questioning of Cuddeford, focussing on the state of the ship leading up to the storm, the availability of lifesaving equipment, and the ship's general stability.

Two eye-witness statements from Ventnor were also taken in as evidence, one from a retired Nautical Assessor of the Board of Trade,and one from an Admiral.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001702/18780828/082/0007#
Shipping and Mercantile Gazette

Wednesday 28 August 1878
p7

THE EURYDICE COURT MARTIAL

Yesterday the inquiry into the loss of her Majesty's ship Eurydice, which foundered of Dunnose Point, Isle of Wight, on March 24 last, was opened on board the Duke of Wellington flagship, Portsmouth. The Court was formally opened at half past 10 o'clock as a court-martial on the two survivors of the Eurydice —Benjamin Cuddeford, Able Seaman, and Sydney Fletcher, Ordinary Seaman; but so soon as they had given their evidence they were discharged, and other testimony was gone into. The Court was composed of the following Officers:—  Admiral E. G. Fanshawe, C.B, Commander-in-Chief at Portsmouth, president; Captains Carpenter (Duke of Wellington), M. Jones (Asia), Arthur (Vernon), J. E. Erakine (Boadicea), F. T. Thomson (Victoria and Albert), E. Kelly (Cyclops), D. G. Davidson (Serapis), C. J. Brownrigg (Euphrates), G. Parsons (Jumna), and F. P. Doughty (Crocodile).

Benjamin Cuddeford, who was first sworn, said: "I was an able-bodied Seaman on board her Majesty’s ship Eurydice on March 24. The statement now read is the statement I made before the coroner. It is true account of what I said and did on March 24. In reply to the President witness said: I have been to sea 21 years. I have been able-bodied Seaman for 14 years. On board the Eurydice I was at first Captain's Coxswain, and at the time of the accident I was Second Captain of the quarter-deck. It was my afternoon watch on Sunday, March 24. It was the custom on board the Eurydice for men not on the watch to remain below until wanted for duty. I was on deck nearly the whole the afternoon, and I saw Captain Hare on deck and on the bridge at various intervals. I remember seeing him on deck at half-past 12 o'clock, and at 10 minutes past 2 o'clock. I saw him on deck again shortly after half-past 3. He then on the bridge. My watch came on duty shortly after half-past 3. Afterwards an order was given to set starboard and studding sails, and more sail was subsequently set. Soon after the watch was called to shorten sail, which was done. I cannot now remember who was the Officer of the watch. I think it was Mr. Randolph, Sub-Lieutenant.

The President: When the order was given to shorten sail what sails were ordered to be taken in ?

Witness- The Captain gave orders take in the upper sails, and he ordered the men down from aloft. The Officer of the watch was then forward assisting to take in the lower studdingsails which the Captain had ordered be taken in.

On what part the ship was the Captain?— He was carrying on duty on the quarter-deck, and the Officer of the watch was on the forecastle, where he had been sent by the Captain to assist in taking in the sail. From half-past 12 to 10 minutes past 2 o'clock, when the lower studdingsail was set, there was a moderate breeze blowing, and I noticed no difference in the weather until the squall came on. The ship was under all plain sail at 12 o'clock, and at 12 20 the topmast studdingsails were set, and later the lower studdingsails.

At what rate was the ship going ?—The leg was hove just after the lower studdingsail was set, and the ship was going at the rate of 8 1/2 knots per hour.

When the Captain gave the orders to take in the upper did name the sails, did he name the sails that were to taken in ?— The order he gave quickly was that "Watch upper sails."

Did the topgallant men go aloft ?—Some went aloft, but I do not remember the number. The starboard quarter boat was washed away about one minute after the order was given to shorten sail. It was about one minute after the Captain gave the order to the men to go aloft that the gale struck the Ship and she heeled right over. When the starboard quarter-bot was washed away the vessel was going, to the best of my knowledge, about 12 knots an hour.

Was the ship’s head altered during the successive events that you have described ?—I did not notice.

Did you at the time consider, as a Seaman, that everything was done during your afternoon watch on March 24 in a seamanlike manner likely to prevent danger to the ship ?— In my opinion everything was done in seamanlike manner, and no confusion prevailed.

Was that your opinion at the time ?— Yes.

What means were there for saving life board the ship? -There were two round buoys in the bow of each boat, and life-belts for all the Crew. The Eurydice sailed from Bermuda, I believe, on March 6.

Are you aware of any general order on board the Eurydice for closing the main deck ports either at fixed times or in the event of had weather or sudden squalls ?—No.

Were the main deck ports the deck ports open or closed? Were the sashes open or closed?— The main deck ports were open except two—one each side; the sashes the starboard side were not shipped. I cannot say whether the lower half ports were closed or open. I had a conversation with some the men on the main deck that afternoon, and I had an opportunity of seeing that the ports on the main deck were open.

Did the ship complete taking in provisions at Bermuda ? I believe so.

Did she take in as much provisions as she could stow ?—I don't know how much she took in. The provisions she took in were taken in at the last moment.

Hov long before you sailed from Bermuda did you take in your water supply ?—At the last moment.

Did you take any stores for conveyance to England? — Yes.

What did the stores comprise?— I saw some wire rigging and oilcans brought on board. I do not know where they stowed. Some were stowed on the lower deck during the passage. They were secured by cleats.

When the water tanks were empty on board the Enrydice were you in the habit of filling them up again with salt water?—No.

Was that ever done?—No.

Was there any alteration of the stowage of the ballast of the ship during the time you were in the ship?—None.

By the Court: After we left Bermuda restriction was was put on the use of water. During the time we were in commission we always wore white working rig. When Sen we wore a blue working rig, and this saved a great deal of water in washing.

What was the state of the weather on March 24 ?—Moderate up to 3 o’clock.

Was it squally or threatening ?—No; there was a steady breeze blowing. The sun shone brightly at times. I did not notice any clouds banking up.

Did the squall shrike you as having the appearance of an ordinary one ?—I was busy at the time, and did not notice.

Did yon notice when the ship first began to draw from under the land ?—No.

Had you yourself every confidence in the ship's stability ? Yes.

What was the general feeling amongst the ship's company as to her stability?—I do not know.

Did you ever hear any of the Crew express distrust as to her stabiiity ?—No.

Where did you last see the Captain, and what was be doing? -He was right aft on the bottom of the ship. He was standing still. The last words I heard him say were, "It is of no avail." The standing rigging was wire, not rope. The topmast and topgallant rigging was also wire. When the squall struck the vessel nothing was carried away, to the best of my knowledge. I think I made a mistake with regard to the topgallant standing rigging. It was not wire, but rope.

Sydney Fletcher, Ordinary Seaman, was next called and sworn. The evidence which he gave at the coroner's inquest, held at Ventnor on March 27, was read over to him. In his cross-examination he stated that the Mate of the main deck issued a general order that the ports should be closed when it was observed that a squall or bad weather was coming on. The provision-room filled at Bermuda.

Captain G. P. Polkinghorne produced a chart showing the position of her Majesty's ship Enrydioe at midnight on March 24 last, and the report made by witness to the Admiral Superintendent as to the position of the Eurydice when discovered by the Camel tug was put in and read.

Mr. R. B. Baker, retired Nautical Assessor of the Board of Trade, deposed that he wrote a letter to Admiral Fanshawe on March 25 last in which he stated " Yesterday (Sunday, March 24) I was in the verandah of my house at 4pm., when the unfortunate vessel which has just foundered hove sight. I made her out to be a frigate under full sail, royals and also foretopmast and lower studdsails, with her yards braced well forward, on the port tack, wind then about N.W, ship heading about N.E. All the time squall was brewing from about N.N.W., thick and dense. I became interested, as the ship continued to carry the same sail. I saw the royal either taken in or something carried away. I supposed the latter, as it is unusual for men-of-war to take in any one royal at a time. After a few minutes the squall burst upon my house with considerable violence, accompanied by heavy drifting snow. It must have struck the ship in two or three seconds after, blew directly towards her. In about 10 or 15 minutes it cleared again, and the ship was not then in sight. My object in writing is to state facts, and may tend to exonerate the unfortunate Commander of the frigate. This squall did not to me appear to have much wind in it, but to be merely a heavy downfall of either rain or snow, and I think it was likely whoever was in charge of the deck of the frigate may have been deceived, as I was, particularly as the wind was light and the weather fine before the squall. It has struck me that any exoneration from carelessness may be gratifying to the friends of those in command or on duty at the time of the dreadful calamitv. I have no hesitation saying that the snowstorm clearly did not assume the appearance of such a gust of wind as followed it. The barometer had been falling; but the weather remained fine, and, consequently, was very deceptive. I thought they were to reduce sail in frigate fashion; but, unfortunately, if it was so, it was too late."

Captain Carpenter: Was there anything in the configuration of the land to prevent those on board the Eurydice from seeing the squall ? I do not think so; it covered such a space, and was so dense. The squall must have been seen after the ship steamed out from Dunnose. I expected to see the vessel shorten sail; but I thought that those on board desired to take the sails in together smartly— frigate-like.

Admiral Robert Tryon deposed to seeing the Eurydice pass Ventnor on the afternoon of March 24 last. He noticed that her plain sail was set. There was a strong tide running against her, and though she might have been sailing at seven, yet she was not passing the land at more than four knots. The canvas the vessel was under was not more than she was justified in carrying, as there had been several snow squalls that morning off Ventnor unaccompanied by wind of any moment. When the Eurydice passed Ventnor there was a moderate breeze blowing off the land, the water was smooth, and the sun was shining brightly. Witness lost sight of the ship before the storm broke upon Ventnor, which it did shortly before 4 o'clock. A schooner passing Ventnor before the squall burst had hauled down her topsails.

Mr. James Chappel, Master of the Lord Vivian; Mr. Louttit, Master of the steamship Badger; and Mr. W. L. Jenkins, Master of the schooner Emma, deposed to being at sea on March 24, and struck by the squall which capsized the Eurydice. They were of opinion that those on board the Eurydice could not see the storm approaching they were too does inshore. The inquiry was then adjourned until this day (Wednesday).

---

TEXT

TO DO 

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18780828/005/0002
Hampshire Telegraph
Wednesday 28 August 1878
p2-3

THE LOSS OF THE EURYDICE.

OPENING OF THE COURT-MARTIAL.

Yesterday morning a, Court-Martial assembled on board of the Duke of Wellington,, flag-ship in Portsmouth Harbour, to inquire into the loss of H.M.S. Eurydice. The Court was comnposed of the following officers:— Admiral Edward G. Fanshawe, C.B., President; Captain the Hon. Walter Cecil Carpenter, H.M.S. Duke of Wellington ; Captain Theodere Morton Jones, H.M.S. Asia; Captain William Arthur, H.M.S. Vernon; Captain James Elphinstone Erskine, H.M.S. Boadicea; Captain Edward Kelly, H.M S. Cyclops ; Captain Duncan George Davidson, H.M.S. Serapis; Captain Charles James Brownrigg, H.M.S. Euphrates; and Captain George Parsons, H.M.S. Jumna. George P. Martin, Esq., barrister-at-law, officiated as Deputy-Judge-Advocate of the fleet.

On the Court being opened, the two survivors weremarched in as prisoners pro forma, in charge of the Provost Marshal, Mr. John Hill. On the names of the officers composing the Court being called over, the survivors were asked if they had any objection to the members, and they replied int the negative. 

The Deputy-Judge-Advocate of the Fleet then read the following:—

Admiralty, 28th March, 1878.  
Sir,-I amn commanded by my Lords Commissioners of being cial the Admiralty to transmit to you herewith their Lordships' warrant for assembling a court-martial at Portsmouth for the purposes of inquiring into the cause of the loss of H.M.S. Eurydice on the 24th instant, and of trying Benjamin Cuddeford, A.B,, and Sidney Fletcher, ordinary seaman, the survivors of that ship, under the 91st and 92nd Sections of the Naval Discipline Act, 1866

I am also directed to acquaint you that my Lords desire that you should preside at this Court, and that the enquiry should embrace the condition of the Eurydiec in all respects, including that of stability.  
I am &c.  
ROBERT HALL.

Admiral E. G. Fanshawe, C.B.,  
Portsmouth,  
The warrant also addressed to Admiral Fanabawe was as follows:—  
"Whereas you have reported to us the loss of Her Majesty's ship Eurydice on the 24th of March, 1878, and whereas we think fit that a Court-martial shall be held, pursuant to the custom of the Navy, to inquire into the cause of the loss of the said ship, and that Benjamin Cuddeford, able seaman, and Sidney Fletcher, ordinary seaman, the survivors of the said ship, shall be tried undert the 91sat and 92nd sections of the Naval Discipline Act, 1868, we do hereby require and direct you to assemble a Court-martial as soon as convenientiy may be, which Court, you being President thereof, is hereby required and directed to inquire into the causes of the loss of Her Majesty's ship Eurydice, and to try the said Benjamin Cuddeford and Siney Fletcher accordingly."

The section referred to was as follows:-

91st Section :-When any one of her Majesty's ships shall be wrecked, or lost, or destroyed, or taken by the enemy, such ship shall, for the purposes of the Act, be deemed to remain in commission until her crew be regularly removed into some other of H.M.'s ships of war, or until a Court-martial shall have been held, pursuant to the custom of the Navy in such cases, to inquire into the cause of the wreck, loss, destruction, or capture of the said ship.

92nd Section :- When no specific charge shall be made against any officer or seaman, or other person in the Fleet, for, or in respect, or in consequence of such wreck, loss, destruction, or capture, it shall be lawful to try all the officers and crew, or all the surviving officers and crew, of any such ship, together, before one and the same Court, and to call upon all or any of them when upon their trial to give evidence on oath or affirmation before the Court touching any of the matters then under inqiry, but no officer or seaman or other person shall he obliged to give any evidence which may tend to criminate hmself.

The Deputy Judgc-Advocate said Cuddeford would be the first witness.

The President asked whether it was necessary that the d to him Povost-Marshal should remain in charge Of the Prisoners ? and the Deputy Judge-Advocate replied that it was not, if the Court chose to order otherwise.

The guarding of the survivors as ordinary prisoners was then relaxed, the Provost-Marshal resigning his custody of the two men.

Benjamin Cuddeford, able seaman, was called, and, in answer to the President, said he was an able seaman on board the Eurydice on the 24th of March last. The statement made by witness at the Admiralty as to the circumstanees of the catastrophe was read. It was ,as follows :—

On Sunday afternoon, March 24th, thw watch at quarter to four was called to take in the lower studdingsail, I was on deck to attend the lower tack, and let it go. The Captain gave orders to take in the upper sails. The wind was then freshening. The Captain then ordered the men to come down from aloft, and then to let go the topsail halyards. The gunner's-mate let go the topsail halyards, and another man, Bryant, let go the main sheet. The water was then running in over the lee nettings, on the starboard side, and washed away the cutter. The foretopmast studdinigsail was then set, the wind being then about a point abaft the port beam. I caught hold of the main truss fall, and then caught hold of the weather netting and got on to the ship's side. You could then see her keel. She righted a little before going down, bringing the mizentopsail out of the water. She then went gradually over from forward, the greater part of the hands being on the fore part of the ship outside. She then turned over, bringing the port cutter bottom upwards. I and another man (Richards) cut the foremast gripe. I then saw the Captain standing on the  vessel's side near the quarter boat, and the two doctors struggling in the water. I swam then some distance and found a life-buoy, which I put over my head, and then picked up some pieces of wood, which I gave to some of the men in the water. I then came across the copper punt, in which were five men. The sea capsized the punt, when they all got on to the bottom. They asked me if there were any signs of help. I told them the best thing they could do was to keep their spirits up. One of them was just letting go his hold of the punt. I do not know his name but think he was a man left behind from the Tamar. I next saw Mr. Brewer, the boatswain, with a cork life-belt on. He was struggling strongly.I then saw Fletcher with a belt and a beaker. I lost sight of him during the snow storm. About five p.m., after the weather clrared up, I saw Fletvher again, and we kept together and saw land. We made for the land, but finding it too rough we turned our backs to it and saw a schooner. The schooner bore down upon us and sent a boat, and picked up two officers (whom I had not previously noticed), with a wash deck locker. A rope's end was thrown to me from the schooner, and I was picked up. I judge that I was in the water about an hour and 20 minutes. The officers picked up were Lieutenant Tabor, and a Captain of the Royal Engineers, who came on board at Bermuda, with a corporal, bombardier, four privates, and an officer's servant of the Royal Engineers. The ship capsized about ten minmutes before four. The Captain was giving orders at the time, and had been carrying on the duty. We rounded in weather braces, and set the lower studdinigsail at two p.m., The ship was then going 8 1/2 knots. I do not know who was the officer of the watch, as the Captain was carrying on the duty. The Hon. Mr. Gifford avent to the wheel to assist, at the time the water was coneing over the nettings, in consequence of an order being given to put the helm up. I believe some of the main deck ports were open to let air in for the main deck mess. I don't think the hands were turned up; there was hardly time for it. I saw most of the men forward take off their clothes and jump off before I lost sight of her in the squall. When the snow cleared off she was gone.

The President asked if that was a true account of what he saw and did, and witness replied that it was.-Q.: Have you anything to add of matters which came within your own observation which would give further information to the Court?-No, sir. —In answer to further questions, witness said he bad been to sea 21 years on 9th proximo, and during the whole of that time he had been in the Royal Navy. He had been in the Eurydice about 14 months. It was about 14 years since he was rated an able seaman. For the first three months he did duty as Captain's coxswain of the ship, and then he got rated second captain of the forecastle, and then captain of the quarter deck. He was in that postion at the time of the accident. It was his afternoon watch on the 24th of March last. It was not customary on board to turn the hands of the watch up until they were wanted for duty. That was done on the day of the accident. He was on deck the best part of the afternoon of the day in in queston, when not wanted for duty. He noticed the Captain on deck just after half-past twelve o'clock, just after two, and about half-past three. The Captain was on the bridge then. Witness was asked to describe all the work done by the watch that afternoon, and he said just after 12.30 the port watch (his watch) was called to round in and set topmast studdingsails, which was done. About ten minutes past two they rounded in again and set the lower studdingsail. Just after half-past they were called again to shorten sail. They took in the lower studdingsail, and the Captain gave the order  "Watch, in upper sails." The men were hardly aloft before they were called down again. That was all the work done by the watch in the afternoon. Sub-Lieut. Randolph was officer of the watch that afternoon. The officer of the watch was forward superintending taking in the lower studdingsails when the captain gave the order to take in upper sails. The captain gave the order for the watch to take in the lower studdingsail, and when he did so the officer of the watch was on the bridge, and the captain told him to go forward and superintend the work. From 12.30 to 2.10, when the lower studdingsail was set, there was a moderate breeze. From the time it was set to the time it was taken in the weather was about the same until the squall came on. In addition to the topmast and lower studdingsail the ship was carrying all plain sail up to noon, when the topmast studdingsail was set, and after two the lower studdingsail was set. The gallant studdsngsails were unbent at Bermuda, and were not set. Just after the lower studdingsail was set, the captain gave the order to heave the log, and the quartermaster reported 8 1/2 knots -Q.: When the lower studdingsanile were taken in were the lee lower braces ordered to be stretched, and the lee lower lifts overhauled, or any order given to lead you to suppose that the lower studdingsail was taken in preparatory to altering course, or bracing up, or did you believe it was on account of increasing wind?-I believe it was on account of the increasing wind.— Was the foretopmast studdingsail boom complaining when you attended the lower studdingesail tack ?-I did not notice that it was. -Had it been complaining seriously must you not have nearly heard it?-Yes, I must have noticed it. When the Captain gave the order "Take in upper sails " he did not name what sails were to be taken. He gave the order quickly. "Watch, in upper sails." The topgallantyardmen went aloft, but he did not notice the number. From the time the order was given to go aloft to the men being ordered down again was about a minute, and just about that time the squall struck the ship. When the starboard quarter boat was washed away the ship was going, to the best of his knowledge, about 12 knots. Directly the order was given to put the helm up the Hon. Mr. Gifford ran up the after ladder to go to the wheel, but he could not tell whether the helm was up or down. He did not notice whether the direction of the ship's head was altered during the events which he had described.— Did you at the time consider, as a seaman, that everything was done during your watch that afternoon in a manner likely to prevent danger to the ship ?-Everything was carried on in a seamanlike manner, and nothing likely to incur danger.- There were two round life-buoys on the bow of each boat, one each side of the bridge, and a life belt for every man in the cutter The Eurydice sailed from Bermuda, he believed, on March 6th. The ship's company messed on the lower and main decks. He messed in No.5 mess on the lower deck, starboard side. He could not say whether the lower deck scuttles were inout. He was not aware of any general order as to the closing of the main deck ports in case of sudden squalls bad weather, or at fixed times. The main dock ports were opened except two on each side, one abreast of the mainmast, and one two ports further aft. The sashes of the ports were not shipped. The ports closd were those with guns in them. The upper parts of those ports were triced up and bolted, He could not say whether the lower part of the other ports was opened or shut. He was in one of the main-deck messes during the afternoon, so had an opportunity of seeing whether the ports were open or shut. He believed the ship completed provisions at Bermuda. He did not know when as much as could be stowed was taken into the vessel. The ship filled up with water at the last moment before leaving Bermuda. They took in stores for conveyance to England. They included a lot of wire rigging, oil cans, and a lot more stores, which he did not see. There were no extra stores stored on the upper or main decks, but he believed there were some on the lower deck, some just abaft the mainmast, and some on top of the sail bins amidships. He conld not say how these were secured.— Did you ever in the Eurydice, when the tanks were empty, fill them with salt water ?-No.-Was it ever done ?-No.-Was any alteration in the stowage of the ship or the stowage of the ballast made whilst you were there?— No.—By Captain the Hon. W. C., Carpenter: After we filled up with water at Bermuda there was a restriction placed upon the use of water.— During the time we had been in commission we always wore a white working rig, and to save water we wore a blue working rig on the way home from Bermuda. That made a considerable saving of water by not having so much washing to do. I first noticed signs of a squall when the watch piped "In lower studding sails."— Did it not strike you as being more than an ordinary squall ?- I was busy at work and did not take notice. I cannot say whether the leesheets and halyards of the upper sails were let go when the upper yardmen went aloft, or at any other time. When the squall struck the ship I saw the main-sheet, and maintopsail halyards let go. The main-sheet was all clear, but the mainsail did not flow, owing to the lee clew being in the water.-Capt. Jones;: Had you every confidence in the ship as regarded her stability ?-Yes.—Can you say what the general feeling among the ship's company was with regard to that point? — I cannot say.— Did you ever hear of them express any doubts on the subject?—No.— By Captain Arthur: On leaving Bermuda we took some live stock and fresh beef — two or three days' supply— for issue to the ship's company.—By Captain Erskine: The sails were full when the ship heeled over. When I last saw the Captain he was right aft on the bottom of the ship, He was by himself when I left him, and I believe he went down with his ship. The last words I heard him say were, "It's of no avail." There were a great number of men outside the ship besides the Captain, but they were forward. I did not actually see the ship go down. When I left she was pretty nearly out of sight-sinking. -By Captain Davidson: The ship's standing lower rigging was of wire, and also the topmast rigging. — By Captin Brownrigg; I believe only the lee clew of the mainsail was set.—By Captain Carpenter: Nothing carried away, to my knowledge, when the squitall struck the ship.

Sidney Fletcher, ordinary seaman, late of H.M.S. Eurydice, said he had been in the Navy two years and five months, but only five months in the Eurydice. The statement which this witness had also made with reference to the affair was read by the Deputy Judge-Advocate of the Fleet, and stated by witness to hb correct. It was a similar statement to that made by Cuddeford. He was having tea at the time when he found the ship heeling over and the water running in through the starboard ports. He ran on deck and assisted to overhaul the topsail halyards. He then walked on the side of the ship along to the quarter, from whence he dived into the water. The Captain was on the port quarter, and witness saw him go down with the ship. He messed on the main deck, No. 21, on the starboard side. He believed some of the ports were open, and some shut. When he ran on deck the lee water ways filled right up on the main deck, and he could not look out of the port for the water running in it. When he went up on deck the heel of the ship was not so great as to make it difficult for him to get to the hatchway ladder. There were orders from the mate of the main deck to close the ports in rough weather, when there was a squall coming on, or in any other similar emergencies. These orders were given to the men in the messes. Mr. Allen, the gunner, was mate of the main deck. He did not know to whether Mr. Allen gave those orders in consequence of any instructions received from the Captain. Before leaving Bermuda the ship took in as much provisions as she could stow. The ship was filled up with water the day before leaving. They brought home some stores. On the lower deck abaft the mainmast was a quantity of biscuit. He believed it was all used on the voyage home. On the 24th March he believed the place where it had been stowed was quite clear. There was no alteration in the stowage of the ship or ballast during the time he was on board, to his knowledge.

By Capt. Carpenter: When I came on deck I was not told to overhaul the foretopsail halyards. I did it of my own accord. I was assisting another man in the work, The foretopsail yard had not come down. I did not hear anyone give orders to let go the topsail halyards.

By Captain Jones : I do not know how the topsail clew-lines were fitted. The driver was not set. There was a general rush to get from the main to the upper deck when the ship heeled over. He did not, however, see one get up.

By Captain Erskine;: We had not experienced any sudden triopical stormis whilst in the West Indies.
 
By Captain Brownrigg : About eight or nine minutes elapsed from the time I ran on deck to the ship sinking. I believe the sails were filled when I went on deck.

By Captain Parsons: I did not hear any pipe "Clear lower deck."

Both Cuddeford and Fletcher were allowed to leave the Court at will, but were told to be within call in case they might he needed.

Staff Captain Charles James Polkinghorne, Master Attendant of Portsmouth Dockyard, produced a chart showing the position of H.M.S. Eurydice at midnight on March 2th. Between 3.30 and 4p.m. on that day the ebb tide had made, and was setting strongly to the south-west. The rate of the tide would be from three to four knots. He proceeded to the wreck on the night of March 24th. In consequence of that he made a report, which was now read to the Court. It was as follows:

Portsmouth Yard,  
March 25th, 1878.

Sir,-I have to report that in accordance with your verbal orders at nine p.m. on the 24th inst. relative to the sad accident which had occurred to H.M.S. Eurydice, I left the Dockyard at 8.30 p.m. in the Camel tug, with Mr. Bowen, of Veutnor, and passing inside the N.W. Princessa buoy I shaped a course W.S.W. in the exact track a ship would take after passing Deunnose point, and at midnight I came on the wreck of the Eurydice, with her head to the south-east. She had her fore topgallantmast gone close to the cap, with the the topgallant mast hanging before the fore topsail. The main topgallantsail was set, and the main royal pole gone short off to the eyes of the topgallant rigging. The mizen royal was partially furled, and the ship in 11 1/2 fathoms of water. Dunnose bearing W.E.W. 2 1/2 miles ; Culver Cliff, N.N.E. half E. I anchored the Camel, in charge of Captain Dathan, Assistant Master-Attendant, with lights to indicate danger, half a cable's length north of the wreck. I then proceeded, accompanied by Lieutenant Gough, Flag Lieut., in the Grinder tug, to Ventuor, and communicated with the schooner Emma, Jenkins, master, whilst Lieutenant Gough landed in the Coastguard boat, and communicated with the Commander of the Coastguard. I then returard to the Dockyard at six a.m., in the Grinder, leaving the Caml in charge of Staff-Captain Dathan, anchored near the wereck, and gave him instructions to make a careful search at daylight for any survivors from this sad catastrophe.

Mr. Robert Benjamin Baker, examinedl by the President said he wrote a note to him pointing out the peculiarities of the squall. It was as follows:—

Sunnyside, Oak-road, Shanklin,  
March 25th, 1878.

Dear Sir,—Some years ago, when you were a mnember the of the Thames Conservancy Board, I was also a member of that Board, the nominee of the Board of Trade. I was also, at that time, Nautical Assessor to the Board  of Trade. I mention these matters to let you know who I am. Yesterday (Sunday) I was on the verandah in front of my house, at four p.m, when the unfortunate vessel which has since foundered, hove in sight. After rounding Dunnose I took my glass, and made out this ithin vessel to be a frigate in full sail to royals, also foretopmast and lower studdingsails, with her yards braced up forward on the port tack. The wind was about N.W. and the ship headed about N.E. At this time the had storm was brewing from about N. to N.N.W., thick and dense. I became interested, as the ship continued to carry the same sail, when I saw the mizen royal either taken in or something carried away- I supposed the latter, as it is unusual for a man-o-war to take in one royal at a time. In a few moments the squall burst upon my house with considerable violence, accompanied by heavy drenching snow, which must have struck the ship in two or three seconds after, as it was blowving directly towards her from N.N.W. In about 10 or 15 minutes it cleared up again, when the ship was not in sight from my verandah. I thought nothing of it, supposing the ship had passed towards the Culver. My object in writing is to state facts that may tend to exonerate the unfortunate commander of the frigate. This squall did not to me appear to have so much wind in it, but merely a heavy downfall of either rain or snow, and I think it was likely that whoever was in charge of the deck of the frigate may have been ideceived as I was, particularly as the wind was light, and the weather fine before the squall. As an old sailor I feel it my duty to let you know that in my opinion any man might have believed that the approaching squall had little wind in it. It has struck me that any exoneration of the carelessness might be gratifying to the friends of those in command or on duty at the time of this dreadful calamity, and this has induced me to writo to you, and you are quite at liberty to make any use of the letter which may seem best to you to exonerate Captain Hare and others. I have for no hesitation in saying that the snow storm cloud did not assume the appearance of such a gust of wind as proceeded from it. Quite the contrary. The barometer had been gradually falling, but the weather remained fine, consequently very deceptive. I thought that they were going to reduce sail in frigate fashion.but unfortunately, if so, it was too late. I am induced to trouble you, as I have learned here to-day opinions expressed adverse to the skill and proper attention of those in charge of the frigate, and some of these opinions have been expressed by men who are quite strangers to me.  
I am, dear sir, yours faithfully,  
R. B. BAKER  
Admiral Fanshawe. Portsmouth.

He should think the Eurydice passed Dunnose at about one and a-half miles distant. His house stood on an eminence considerably above the level of the sea. To the north-west of his house the land gradually rose. That impeded from his sight the lower part of the snow cloud. As there had been no wind that day, that assisted him in the belief that there Was not much wind in the cloud.

By Captain Carpenter : The sky for a considerable distance was overcast by the cloud, which was very dense, for nearly three-quarters of an hour before the squall broke. After the Eurydice opened out from Dunnose I think she must have seen the squall coming.

By Captain Jones : After the vessel rounded Dennose I expected to see the sails shortened, but what struck me was that they, frigate-like, were standing by till the last moment, and would then take them in smartly. Not half-an-hour elapsed from the time of my seeing the vessel to losing sight of her.  

Commander Charles Oxley, of Her Majesty's ship Excellent, said he was at Ventnor on the afternoon fo the 24th March last, During the afternoon he saw a man-of-war (supposed to be the Eurydice) pass between three and four o'clock. The ship appeared to be steering east north-east, and was about one and a-half or two miles from the shore. The vessel was under all plain sail, except the mizen royal and the port lower and foretopmast studdingsail. The spanker was set. There was a moderate breeze, and the ship was going from 7 to 8 knots. He had arrived from Portsmouth by the 7(?).30 train, and up to then it had been a bright, fine day. He did not notice any appearances of a storm when the EUrydice was passing Ventnor. About ten minutes to four the wind shifted suddenly to the northward, and a very strong sno squall came on. The high land prevented him seeing the squall till itwas close upon him, and he believed the high land at Dunnose would have partially prevented the Eurydice seeing it coming.

Admiral Robert Tryon said he saw the Eurydice pass Ventnor on the afternoon in question. She pass about 1 1/2 miles from the land. The ship had her foretopmast staysails set, which was unusual in a man-of-war. She evidently came inshore to escape the tide, and he did not believe she was passing the land more than four miles, as the tide was very strong. The forecastle and after part of the deck were crowded with both officers and men looking at the land. The canvas the vessel was under was not more than the ship would be justified in carrying, There had been several snow squalls in the morning, but without wind, The weather was beautifully fine when the Eurydice passed Ventnor, and the sea was calm, He afterwards saw the storm come up. It broke upon Ventnor a few minutes before four o'clock, causing great dakness. He saw the storm about a quarter of an hour before it broke. He remembered seeing a schooner near shorten sail about that time.

also p3 TO DO no ocr

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000272/18780830/036/0003

Manchester Evening News
Friday 30 August 1878
p3

THE EURYDICE COURT MARTIAL.

Portsmouth, FRIDAY.

The court re-assembled a quarter to 12 o'clock this morning on board the Duke Wellington flag ship, Admiral Fanshawe presiding. Mr. W. B. Robinson, chief constructor of the Portsmouth Dockyard, produced a store-book showing that the quantity of ballast carried by the Eurydice when in commission was about 30 tons. In 1854 and 1877 the ballast was stowed as low down possible the ship. Just before the Eurydice left Portsmouth on her last commission she had undergone a thorough repair by Mr. White, of Cowes, and when she left Portsmouth she was in every respect in good condition. Witness was then examined length respecting some apparent discrepancies his evidence of yesterday.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000060/18780830/019/0005
Glasgow Herald
Friday 30 August 1878
p5

THE EURYDICE COURT MARTIAL

The Court Martial on the survivors of the Eurydice was resumed yesterday morning on board the flag-ship Duke of Wellington— Admiral Fanshawe presiding. 

Nejamin Cuddeford, re-called, deposed that it ws the custom on board the Eurydice to serve out a fixed allowance of water each day. On the voyage froma Bermuda the use of water for washing clothes was restrieted. The nunber of washing days was reduced owing to a blue working suit being substituted for the white suit worn in harbour. He saw the port but not the starboard halyards let go when the ship was strck by the squall.

William Hicks, shipwright, diver, gave evidence as to the condition of the ports when he examined them. The starboard bow port was closed, the upper part of the second port, starboard side, was open and the lower half closed.

The whole of the morning was taken up with the evidence of divers as to the state of the ports on the starboard and port sides of the Eurydice when first examined. On the starboard side the guns had run out, and in the majority of cases the upper halves of the ports were open and swinging on their hinges, whilst the lower halves were closed and hooked in. The sashes were closed and the glass broken. The rudder when first observed had a slight cant to port. The evidence as to the state of the rigging wvas similar to that of Admiral Sir Francis McLintock, who expressed the opinion that the effects of the alterations made in the Eurydice in February, 1877, slightly increased the ship's stability.

John Thomas, seaman diver, said he had observed some of the topsail halyard, sheets, and other ropes, which as a seaman he should expect to be let go in a squall, and he found that the foretopsail halyards had been let go on the port side, and it seemed as if a man had been in station to overhaul them, as some of a seaman's clothes were found jammned in the halyards. He noticed the rudder, and found it hard aport as it lay over on the ground.

[EXTRACT : RAISING]

---

TEXT

Two reports at the weekend explained how the court martial was held as a matter of course.

The latter also noted that weather reports for the fateful day of the wreck were taken in evidence.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000369/18780831/101/0008
Reading Mercury
Saturday 31 August 1878

p8

The Eurydice Court Martial.

—The court-martial, which, by the rules of the Service, it was necessary to hold on the two survivors of H.M.S. Eurydice, was opened Tuesday before Admiral Fanshawe, on board the Duke of Wellington, flag ship. Both the survivors, Benjamin Cuddiford and Sidney Fletcher, stated that they were of opinion that everything had been done to secure the safety of the vessel. The masters of various craft which were off the Isle of Wight at the time of the occurrence were examined and said that the squall came on very suddenly, and that although they saw it in time to shorten sail, they believed those on board the Eurydice, from the position of the vessel, had not good an opportunity of knowing it was coming. The inquiry was then adjourned until Wednesday, when several witnesses were examined to the peculiarities of the fatal snow gale of the 24th of March. The inquiry was again adjourned.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000686/18780831/070/0005

Yorkshire Post and Leeds Intelligencer
Saturday 31 August 1878
p5

THE EURYDICE COURT MARTIAL.

The court assembled for the fourth time yesterday. Mr W. B.Robinson, Chief Constructor Portsmouth, was recalled and examined as to the ballast. As far the office records showed the quantity of ballast was about 30 tons.

Mr Nathaniel Barnaby, C.8., Director of Naval Construction, said the course taken in fitting the Eurydice as a training ship was to rig her in the same manner as had been rigged in her former commission, put in her the same amount of permanent ballast to reduce the armament, and to bring her to about the same draught of water as she had had before by a large quantity of provisions and stores. No calculations were made as to whether the ship at her low draught would be precisely the same as at any given period in a former commission ; but it was seen that the changes which were made could not reduce the stability of the ship or interfere with the proper performance of her duties. We had the reports of various officers who had commanded her, and in particular we knew that she had formed part of an experimental squadron in 1846 under Admiral Sir William Parker ; and that in reporting on the ships of that squadron—consisting of the Vanguard, Canopus, Albion, Rodney, Queen, Raleigh, Eurydice, Sparta, and Constance —he stated on August 22d, 1846, that all the ships displayed excellent sailing qualities and stability, and that the advantage was certainly with the Raleigh, followed closely by the Enrydice. There are other reports in papers before the court from Sir Wm. Parker and from other officers, and from a careful inspection of them I can find nothing contrary to the extract I have quoted. She was inclined under my diiection on May 11th, 1877, not for the purpose of discovering whether she was a stable ship, but as a matter of scientific interest, because so far as I know no sailing frigate or larger ship had ever been inclined in the history of the Royal Navy. Two small ships—the Rover and the Scylla—had been inclined many years ago, but they were corvettes of small size.

Was the fact of sailing ships not being inclined due to the circumstances the time that purely sailing ships were used in the navy ? Tne practice of inclining had not then been introduced.

Was there anything inherent in purely sailing ships which might render the process unnecessary? The reason must be the same which rules the present practice in the merchant navy. There are about five millions of tons of registered sailing ships in Great Britain, and is not the practice of any owners to incline their ships, although the process is simple and inexpensive.

Is it the practice of the Admiralty to incline modern steamships which are rigged for sailing ?—It Is the practice of the Admiralty to incline all modern and untried ships whether rigged or not, the reason being that there are great varieties of form and disposition of weights in modern ships. The'designer sets before himself a certain amount of stability as being desirable in order to make a new ship capable of bearing the stress of the sea and wind as other known ships which have given satisfaction to the naval officers who have tried them.

Would you consider it proper in the case of any future sailing ship being fitted out to adopt the practice now adopted by the Admiralty in reference to all modern ships, or the practice of the merchant service ? —If the ship were new we should do it as a matter of course. If she were old and tried ship like the Eurydice, we should undoubtedly do it for the purpose of adding to our stock of knowledge, and curve of stability for the Eurydice was calculated in my office, but I am not sure of the date when was made. It is now before the court. Using the term curve of stability in its ordinary sense, the calculations for it are made on the assumption that no ports or other openings occur which will let in water throngh the ship's sides.

The court adjourned until this morning, when, after Robinson has been further examined on some points, the members will proceed to consider their judgment.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18780831/032/0008

Hampshire Telegraph
Saturday 31 August 1878
p8

THE EURYDICE COURT-MARTIAL.

SECOND DAY.

TO DO 

On Wednesday morning the Court-Martial easebe a ppr,0x on board the Duke of Wellington, flag-ship in Portsmouth Harbour, to inquire into the loss of Her Majesty's ship Eerpldice. The Court, as before, was corn- inlg qo posed of the following officers :-Admiral Edward "P 0, Feushewe, o~n., President; Captain the Hon. Walter Cecil Carpenter, H.M.S. Disks of Weflidgton; Captain Ona Theodore Morton Jones, H.M.S. Asia; Captain William ford Arthur, 1I.M.. Vernson; Captain James Blphinstone Berm' allotat Erskios,1H.M.S. Boadicea; Captain Edward Kelly, H.M.S after t C~yelpus ; Captaiu. Duncan George Davidson, H.M.S. main ,Serapisa; Captain Charles James Brownrigg, H.M.S. washii flssphriates , andi Captain George Parsons, 13.M.S .Jiussnai. tbl)f I George P. Martin, Esq., barrister-at-law, Officiated its Befer' -Deputy-Judge-Ad vocate of the Fleet, iug ril The inquiry, wye testy repeat, embraces all matters con1- leaven nected with the Stability of the ship. waorkii On the re-aesenolding of the Court en Wednesday Wm~r- w~as isE ing, Cpainl Thomas Keith Hudson, Royal Navy. "'as for wi cleand said on the day that the Essptc-ws oth ae was at (minced (near Cowves, Isle of Wight). Up to 3.80) Stowse that daiy thle weather had been usnusually fine, with bright no ate sunshline and pleasant breeze fr ar about N.N.W. On the of looking tolvards Hurst Castle ho swwhat appeared to fore, bins to hea fog bank gathering over the Hampshire coast, By and flucaltly u~sliseoiingt~he Slent. Ife was surprised to find much so unusij anapearance following the day's bright sun- one hII shn, n h ok atte aoetr wihhe foundhlad getlici fsdleu about two-tenith of an inch. Presently the fog bank heard declared itself in a snow Storm, though the wind at first single was not of much inoment, Within two or three moments fitted' there came a ?? violent gust, and that ait a time when lie The apcprehendssl the squall to have attiiined. its foll force. The halysi snrow% flakles attained ain unusual size, and, falling in one know. ?? mass, renderedl what Should have been near topm, objeots invisible. In about ten miinutes the acind had the RI lulled to its former moderate force, and the sun Came nut but I bl,rigtl 'as before, hut the temperature, which had pro- fly viulygvn no0 indication of approaching snow, had now wsI -becoise icy cold.-Q.: Will yen s ptate, as a sailor, what sail tacit youc Nvould liara considereil it necessary to take in under tthrou those eirecsusntaulces,withi aship in full ?? wvith a medecate the Ea- bracze abeam ?-I should say that the first part of the custern squall arnotld only csdl for the hiandling of thle lighter hefer, cjjnvas, curle' ats soy~u alesni studdiups-ails. He might have Cal taken in sail uinder the circumstances had hoe, on the fe hjoardi ship, h'ad the same uninterrupted -view which was out wI ?? him y beiiig, 120 feet above the level of the sea. sail. In at ship two issues., out to sea he did net think th cap- Dy pearasicest Would lie such as to lead him to expect a screens Spank Squall. Evesij fromt his elevated position -he never W oeiticipsated thle vio~lencs Of the ?? Ciaptail nmont) Car-1s_'oter s /hntise violent gust occurred, it dint not board cu1tel,' my mnind iss being likely to be dangerous to a wa e ship. thei Capta in William Arthur, of II.11.S. Vesaisam (a member eber of. thle Court), u-si next swcorn as a witness. He said onl He tbc dayt) in question he left his house between three and the 01 Icier mm. to walk across the fields towards Park View'. sashles \\'hicu ?? of flee wasy over hie looked to the northwvard were mad observed at snow storm coming on. At first ice con- broire templates1 returning. but f rom the m-isty apiceftansce Of on th' tied now s~flsds lie slid not consider the squall would be of it. hecavy, cube contintued onlhigway. Shortly before reaclhing sashes the fain a it eioderats squall with light eddying snow set firstI an. Ie tools shelter, and. immnediately' afterwards ai ?? Btarbi heavy Squall of w.ind, and snow cattne down, lastintlg for ten il I or fifteen mulisutes, andl then ceased ass audmienly as the ss~ it hati conmmenced. Ile came to the conelusion that the thle gi first squall accomtpanlied by light snow hadf hidden the lower seconid~, and snails the remark that it ?? go hard with out o' nny hiji inl thme Channel which Should be deceived by the andv sit~lo- ig asice hsasl hi en. The asinall wals from1 the NN.NWV., ports andiaholuse was situated 13 miles due north from the scutt' sriof the vk Thme clay, uip to the time oftliessquall, old p1 was reillsaikably haim, andi ?? wind hadl been in the saitine away directtion. Fnssn tlej timue lie first observed its approaciil of it- to (iso tlue th', eniov storin burst could scot have been scabh more thanl tenl minuilters. The clouid, which he observed fitted snore partiieularly sifter it hald passed over, was remark- it, abyblaick, hat i~ii its ap~proach to loin it was obscured by Tb the ltight, drifting snowv which preceded it. Ilie looked at Dick the barometer afior01 the squsill had passed over, and found T~he it lead falleis considlrrablY since the morning, certainly The inure than one-tenth. close ?? Uapt,1aiis Jo sies : Hadl you1 been at sea wcould yo asull have coissidered LIthis a ssjnall of unusnial severity V-sIbruit said before, 1 was deceivedas to its severity. It wenD, however, hatve issdsced me to look at the barometer, n of ti have taken. precauitions had I found any great fall to hav y taken jplace. and ?? Uaptainl Erslelne it is difficult to estimate the force port of the, squall, hut I Should Say about 10. wacs Air. Robert 1ell, principal clerk at thme Admiralty, wa authenticsstcd tico letters from tics Admiralty containing glass information acits regard to observations made of the fror squall by the Astronomer Royal, corrobsorating thle man evidence which lead been given by the various witnesses fouc1 as to the characteristics of thle Squall. Obse Statf-Captaint C. J. Polk-inghorno was re-salled, He tops said as Master-Attendant of the Dockyard he bad been hlard employed, when lila duties did not call him elsewhere, in ?? sprisstsuding tise operations for raising the wreck of thee mon: Esqice. Ile received orders to canses the divers stud wras util.~h,~ employed to observe osfar as possible the position uppi of the main dleck pornts, lower dleck scuttles, shests, and Hi alyards, and thle position of an eihswhc igth yard liable to be reounvd ?? the persons who first observed atarI each of, those Several objects. He gave Staff-Captain lows Datisan, Assistant Master-Attendant, who was constantly doss8 at the wreck,) sm copy of those ordersB, and he was also0 hing aware theaty the divers collectively and individually wee F instruted to pay particular attention to the condition of Gore the ports and senittles, and also to obierve what ropes had Opel been let go. anld Staff-Osiptaita Joseph C. Dathan, Assistant Master- port Attendant of Poctesnouth Dockyard, said he bad been cut employed in that capacity during the whole of the no u operations for raising the wreck. He proved receiving the the orders referred to by Captain Pollcinghorne from that was officer. The slivers examined thee main desk ports from of t time to tune as opportunlityt offered, and also the lower C, deck Scuttles. The sheets, halyards, and other ropes were Doe reported on dsily as tbeswork progressed. As to the water The tankis, they lead tisd no opportunlity of examining them yet anti till within the last day or two. Thes reports wvers made to shei hins, ilessoeiliatcly sifter the obserrsitions were made. He was sreived sit thle wreck On the 25th March. and found had her ait is usin aind topgellantsails set, nicenrtoyal furl ed, gons nisin royaltinast esirtrie awvay, anrad main royal hanging indh before toec topgsllssntsail. 11cr, foretopgallantmast had galls gone short ofi at thle caplisad, this jib and the topmaststay- out- sail aVera` F(e At three amn. everything had disappeared jibh abut~- water, ?? touthe rising of the ti le. The tites was B3 then running S.W., about four knots. At slackwaatee the ding -wrck caine ullc and showedtho same above wateor as before, hanl At ten oeclocle the saume ecorning Mr. Farrell, Master shes Itig-er arrived at the wreck wvith at party of riggers. On peal thefollowing day witness returned to the wreck, when the te divers cut sffiwity le main course, and thle upper yards, No and onushacked. the main tack wrhiich was made fast, also obes uneliacked the main sheet, and stopped the clew to( the 'V ncain rigging. The sheet acas fhiuwiuig, bitt whether it wasc Doe I" go or not lie could not say. Wh~iether the top halyards(1 ?? were111 let go or not hie could nut say. but the yard was, close hot up. V/len thle wreele was first observed, every sail was A set and fall. Thle lee clew' wtas ecumubered by a sail tv'.s believed to he the' lower atuddrugealland the divers cools11 fret not get ait it. The jib and topmnast staysails avrer cut silts away by the divera, but arhether or not the Sheets were a tr fast he could nor give any Satisfactory an~sver. He noted Deo met the tinic tisat lice wreckC ares heeling abouit 15 degrees Ads to starboard, bust lie hvid since had reason to believe that a re it was considerably mere. 'rho lower boom was out as if gen the lower studshinag~eils had jest been taken inl. Bids Capt-ain Iiesic-y Anthony Trollope, Royal Navy, said he ties wrote- a letter so thle President, enclosing a statemen"t Of ma' his observation ci thle squall. In Isis letter lee Stated that Do' on thle Suuedaiy ssftsierostin question he warewaalkiug launder la~ the lee of thle north aNiV, o ll garden, about sex mites ash from Salisbury, tile weather being clear and fine. aith at bel moderate bresec. About ten minutes pasit three wIthuN antaacisg tiseqisll suddenly burst ov-er the house, hug ,almost likce at ?? oi thunder- Ties fury of the sqsiall ace isistesi abosit five minutes. On spea~kinlg to a gases!- chit keopee' a few' dayss sfterwards, lio stated that he the never knew- sessything- to equal the suddenness and fury of orn the squall, R~e was walking in a lane, but quickly got eass into sin opru hiel sis lise avas afraid thle trees, avers going to the be rootesd ?? his evidence, Capt. Tlrollopce ups said there were no iuldieatiocns of the coining of thes squall refi until it beast sipsis hiisn The north wall of Isis gardhets01 MAn nec ai lcsgh belt of trees WrO~ld impede his vieccof atett sisroacli- ?? lu storm. Snow beganu to fall before thle actull sqaalM1 shii hurst. by The Court then adjourned for Iunclison. On re 55- the semblitig, th Captain Polkirughornie wacs re-called. He said lie lead sta bheen in the habit oi noting the baroumetereveryfouurihoursc rcc On March 23rd the readling Was :-Noon, barosmeter. 29.90 ; to I thlerisonotoler 43; wiosd N. and by AV., fresh ; 4 p.m., barsi- Ii'si meter, 29.84; ts i-ciiotieter. 40; cinld. N-NA.W, fresh; lia mnidesight, baronectui. 29.786; tihernomletrr, 34; lviud, was ?? fresh, scrilks of sisa March 24th. 8 a.u for barooseter, 29.C8; *iserissoiucter, 34; avind, ?? fresh, salt with squalls; ib.c ss:isletcr 29-52; thcrluconsetsr, 37; pre Windi N. ald by \V.. K vig and sqjually ; p.m., licatier C thrcsesiiusg ; 4 ois ( ?? a ?? ss1issll ?? tlie north- waysd witlls aowv. b. ncOset1er. 29-60 ; ttlermllsmsatri. 3:i. Up gtlh to 7 a ns., the 25th, there wvas no further fall in tise baro- IVit moters It, rectained stationary oatil the tilue iistioued. i and then rose rapidly, and by noon had risen to 29-81. ?? Mr. John Farrell, master rigger, of Pourtsiuouthc Doul- stow, yard, said he woas employed at tice wreck of the Jissplsdiee redic on the day following that on wrhich she capsized. lie lcias prov only present for a short tinme then. On scriring tit the was wreck he found that the upper sails wvero boing elcared ploy away by Mr. Hardy, Assistant Queen's liarbour 2laster. her I lea.l uo ?? of observing ?? sheets aud halyards 'r that acould be likely to be let go in ease of a sudden squslil. give It Wvis partly cleared away before lie arrired. yenu Mr. Joseph Samuel lfarding, Assistant Quceens ?? resp Master iaud Admirsilty Pilot, said he was cunployed at the T1 wreck of the ?? y -irc sh1ortly after she sank. lie observed asse achat sheets std halyards hail ben let go. lie observed W1 that tie fore topjihlianitmst had carsied away. Th' Doe royals had ?? elerio:l ul), tlse mizese royal hsd one the gasket passsed round it. Thc mizen topsail vsird WaIBs Oi cgraa tle e'ip, the smiztn topgallant yard wais about malf-vsy ecnti dovsi thoe snast. Thoe stlrboard mnizen topgallatst sholt COll] vats csairioed awcs'. Th'e ?? tvas appasently brsiled a5g5e up. 'Ti ita- toio I isgallant sail wsss still set, with the shels of tl fasit. 'lbh tis IU topsiail yard wias dlos tsp iuedor the cat- call harpisios. Bloth iiiain topsail sheets vers foul. Thie ?? i T nlcais topsail halyards hul bees let go. 'Tho star'loard twe forctp;tail sheet had 31so bece let go. 'he port one wvas a'il fast. 'l'he port foretolisail lialyard s w alSO let go, but the fore 3'silua (Iwtssilt dloes iii in its place, Ile seetita diver ?? rt to emeba.klc the miniti sheet, bit hie Could not tell hiun ee a rhether it hail btseu let go. The foretopmast studdisig- Do& sail U\:is elowed up or tsipled upm alld hauled ?? uP under part the ?? y ad, but thle foretopseast studdingsail nial haly r 'S wvere still fast.- Hor Wias it yon asoertaisied that loitc the saisitopsail sheets and the starboard foretopsail avers shoats wvere let go ?-I had theci easslesi tip by lisnl into it trail boast in which I wvas silsprintendiiig the ?? the iela( fore amd maintopsail tics rove on a bight, or were there sttba taco separate ties to each ?? recollcetion doss not Nver suficsftl3' to ausarer. - htprh r and servo re isuicc lie knew the spanker and was bra 1 dlup, beesasuc it wvas aboutsix or eight feetout of avattr -Did Nou take any steps to see whether the star- meiV bosed fore aid mnaintopsail hslyards had been let go?-ite Yes. I had them examined, asid found they trov quite reco taut, froun which I inferrod they avero fastened on deck. afte By Ce taim Carpeuter: I cannot esv whethor the muad weather oelDI of the mnanasail wnas set, as theo nabilsail icas tail nsot. takeo away for some days afterwairds. On t JBy Calg t 'in Jones : I am speaking of the state of the tit slap is9 6leC avas when she meent down, as I Nac awith the cre3 filest mirly that ivent out. 'The jib avas hanging under Usc the lee si the forefopsfll, with the stay all in si bight, 2nd bye aelilef I Concluded thise jibbeern had carried away. ties bay tloe president: The jibimoom was efterwards re- t ps' t L by the direiors tY have been brolcen off about the r does Ticisiards wters laid, I shoitlilz ByCsstaiii Brow%'trigiU ThHyrd s '2horae vine1 silseit tour poiuits on thcs port qusarter. of t Mlr. B~ell, re'resld, produced Aletrfo hesuiat bn to the c ommuunaider~jrchsef of the North' America Station, asking for a return of the stores on board thd the I Eimidiee at the time she left Bermuda, and a copy of such report, statinig that the estimated wel ht of the stores was app~roxirratly:1 tons. He alsopro need copies of the ogo th Et-V cefrom the.22nd1 of May, 1877,Atothe Si Ii2t fheray 1878. He also produced an Admiralty appoi 'a latr3ae a,17,eooigtn reports on'the sail- pose a- ?? nded designs of the atom cdshp adete dtil r h ?? of the Court. room ThC orahe doredutltefollowing morning, as a er THIRD DAY. to a in On the Court opening on Thursday, Benjamin Cudde- for ~mford was re-called, Hie said before he went to sea to as Bermuda the ship's company were placed on a daily allowance of water. Every morning a quarter of an hour aferte anshad been turned up,the gunner's mats of the The S. main deckt piped cooks of messes to muster at tanks for dicc ,S. washing-water. A fixed allowance was served out, about rolox a.half a tuh full psr mess for washing hands, and a larffke Iquaa tub full for eahmess to wash clothes with,twca ti! as Before they arrived at Bermuda they wore a white .work- eb'r iug rig,whioh necessitated two washings a week, but after cog,5 n1- leaving on the homeward voyage the crew wore a blue OfI working rig, which only caused one washing clay a week, wer consequently only half the amount of usual washing-water Se'" was issued af ter the ship left Bermuda. The wa. ter used the as for washingf hands and feces was the same. Thes wire alfs be hawser, which they were bringing home as stores, was boa. 3D stowed on the Rail bin amidships. The af ter sail bin had -10 ht no stores on it. It was cushioned, and used as a couch by grit' )nthe officers. The bin opened by two trap doors, one in the lett to fore, and one in the af ter end. ;hay i4t, By, Captain Carpenter : I cannot give any idea of how in ad much water was issued on wash-clothes day. There was dra, 1 one big tibful for each mess. There were 27 messes alto- tint ad gather. The fore inaintopsail yards were fitted with star- cen ak board and port topsail tieseand lialyards, the port halyards talc :St sinles, and the starboard double-two ties. They wore not alle its fitted on the bight. Yei lie The President : Were the starbeard maintopsail by,' he halyards let go on deek at the time of the squall V-I don't can ne know. I only saw lbs port halyards let ?? the fore- weE ~a topmoast studdigeari tack started before you lost sight of the ad the ship V-I cannot say. It was my station to let it go, nen Ut but I did not tie so. gra re- ily Captain Brownrigg: The foretopmnast studdingsail be )wwag fitted with a short sheet, a deck sheet end down-haul bav aii tack, anid tripping line. The tripping line was rove the icr t',roiuh a b)10ck of thle yard arm; a thimble in the belly of bee 'to the Sall sa~ds fast to the Clew of the sail. It was net the shil ha customs tn take in the topmast studdingeaci. abaftI all, but Un ~er hefere all. the ye Captain Dathan, re-called, said he could not tell whether cen Ofl the furetopmasat studdingesil was set with the tack hauled -1 MS out when be first saw it.. He only saw half-wvay down the dra CaL. sail. ?? sailwas set full, end seemed complete. bef ip- iv Captain Ptaorsons:We could only see aportion of the I tI InS spaliker, but it seemed folly set.. sail qr ?? - licks, shipwright diver, belonging to Ports-an a1m mouth Dockyard, Said lie observed the state of the star- Lib jot board bowv purt of the Eurydice. He found it closed. it Lib a was closed permneaintly, fearnoughted, and leaded round and the joints on the outside. He was the first person who pas )robserved the second port on the starboard side. The port wbb! onl wraopened,th~e buckler closed, and hooked in. That was, par nid the uppor lhalf-port open, and the lower half closed. The and !%V. Sashes were, Closed, and the glass broken in. The sashes floir .rd were intwvolparts-upper and lewer. All1the glasses were wit in- broken, lint the wooden framework was not. No. 4 pert at of on the starboard side was open-or rather the upper half vat be of it. The lower half was closed and hooked in. The cue a-f cashes were closed, and the glass broken. He was 'the frij 401t first to see those portus. He did not see No. 5 port on the nor 'ry Starboard side first. Another diver saw it before him. lbh Wi1 The upper part of No. 5 port was opened. He thought shi: -a th ashes were open. No. 6 port on the Same side was eon :he th n ot h pe afpr was swinging, but the spe the lowvor half wag gone, and the muzzle of the gun was run hoi ith out onl to lbs, ground. No. 8 port was another gunu pert, the bsand u-as in precisely the same stite aslNo. 6, the other gun Yei .,port on the starboard side, Hle observed a, small square cot bfe scuttle abaf t No. 9 port. It was open. It bad been an ho: all, old port, but a cabin was made there, so that it was done for ieaway with, and permanently fastened ini-the lower half thi 3nsash was closed, and the glass broken. No. 9 port was Sic I ed fittedI the same as No. 1 1, and was in all respects similar to tot rk- it, 002 by Thomas Moctilleek, shsipwright diver, of Daevnport frr: ?? Dockyard, said be saw No. 2 port on the starboard side. 15: onll The lower buckler was closed, and the ball-port swinging, at uly The glass was broken out of the sashes, but they were pro closed. No. 9 port had the lower buckler closed and op ?? caulked in. The upper part was epen, and the glass was wiv 1I broken out of[ the sashes, which ivere apparently closed. th, alil, By Captain Brownrigg: I did not notice the tell-tale on and of the wheel. he ave John Thomas, diver in the employ of Messrs. Siebe ur and German, submarine engineers, of London, Saw No. 3 wi weeO pert on the starboardl side. The upper half ur wvas hanging loose from the hinges, and the lower buckler in ily, was fast and hooked in. The sashes were closed. The w' ling glass of the foremost sash had been burst in. He saw the th the t orotepsail halyards on the port side had been let go, and a on thle man was stationed there, apparently overhauling, as he sees found his clothes jamnmed in the halyarde. Ho did not cdt obsecive whether the jigger had been taken off the wveather 1 8 Ha topsail lips. He saw by the rudder that the helm was re icon liard-a-stssrboard. The rudder was over to port. He ail ?? went to the bhelm and found that he could not get any re thle more Starboard helm. No. 7 port on the starboard side he aind was in the samne condition as No. 3 with regard to the dr lion uprpt.th and Robert Jenkins, sliipwright diver, of Sheerness Dock- wi I he yard, said he found the upper part of No. 7 port on the C: wved starboard side hanging apparently by its hinges. The te~ tamn lower half was shut and :Fhcoked in. The saehee were sri ally closed, but the glass was unbroken. He did not think the E: also0 hinges of the upper half of the Port were broken. in vetro Frank Davis, diver in the emploly Of Messrs. Siebe end co IOf German, said the scuttle marked 12 on the plan was fo bad opened and triced up in the ordinary way, square. Nos. 6 wI and 8 ports on the port side contained the guns. Both hrc itar- ports were closed and securedl in. He and another diver vs icon cut them open, and found the guns secured for sea, with the no mnuzzle-lashinigs on and no tonkins in. The muzzles 'of E sung the guins were close up to the ports and all the tackle at .tbat was tight. When he went down on the Sunday that one tlb mrcm of the jewela cairried away the rudder was amidships. iwer Geor-ge Hardy, rigger diver, belonging to Portsmouth were Dockyard, said'he went out to the wreck at the first. 'satr The topscils, topgallantsails, and coarses wvere set L yet with topgallant sheets gone, and also the topsi a le to sheets, all but the lee mizen-sheet, which He was farst. The foretopmast s~tuddingeall, port side, w nind had ?? goes. The main sheet and thermain tack were cagone. The port fore tack was fast. The spanker was set, q pigand lie went down and cut the out-haul. The foretop - hdgallantiucet was gone off to the "jack." Whoa he out the tay- out-haull Of the spianker it was not hauled close out. The ar~ed jibbeous had been carried sway. was By Captain Carpenter: I knew the foretopmmast stud- .the diogsail tack had teen carried away, because we over- f fore, hauled ?? Jones : How far were the topgallant &I Onte psietivero being ?? impossible t ?? 2o1b On iiethey were let go V-To the best of my recollection 2 tethey ec-a th e pne rails been hauiled up V-No. tirde, No onc else had been down previously to may making these also observations, hi the William Henry Smith, rigger diver, of Portsmouth 1 1 Wits Dockyard, saidtthatbe was one of the divers employed at the 21 ards wreck, Ho found the telltale of the rudder hard-a-pert, w <lose but the rudder hard-a-starboard, The false keel was off. 0 as Admiral Sir Francis Leopold M'Clintoek, rxn.s., said he bi w1a' Pi~Adirat-Superiniteudent of Portsmouth Dockyard Ollfo April, 1875, to April, 1877. During that time the d cut alteration of the Eiarpiice, 29-gunfrigate, to adant her to ci u-crc a training ship was at various times consideren by ?? itctd Dockyard authoritices Orders were sent from the t cirees Admiralty to take the subjectunderconsiderationandmnake B that a report during the spring of 1875.-Will you state the as if general nature of the proposals made and the points eon- hi sidered by the Dockyard officers during their considera-fl id ha tion of these proposals, with the view to aseenrig the a ?? Of maifinteniance of the necessary amount of stability V-The a that Dockyard officers were first called upon to report the in inder largest number of men they could accommodate, also w mliles wh~ether thle ship could carry seven 64-pounder gunus, one itb a being a revolving one. The question of stability wvas not atl ,hont alludedl to at tise early stage. Before forwarding draw- a ouse0, iags they w-ould not considerthe effect which thealterations V1 (1ps all would have upon the stability of the ship, unless the re aine- chances called for any special remark. The question of ' b h the stability of ships is dealt with in the Comptrolle' a r~y ?? and not in the Doskyards.-Then would at be the t ,'got case that in forwvarding the plans dated in 1875 and t ng to those dated in February, 1877, which last were based in Iloise, uponl some recommendations by Captain Hare, p( quail, referred to the Dockyard officers, these plans would not anda necessarily convey the warrant of the Dockyard officers Of mrli- with regard to their effect upon stability V-When the ho ?? Ship is nearly ready for sea her stability is usually tested hm by ain officer sent down from the Comptroller's Office, at hi .- -.0- th Admialt . .Therwa nohn in the altertion ine ?? Adutitialty. There was nothing in t'ao ali orations infU the .Eu,-'diee to give rise to any apprehension that her n vohad stabilitc i-ould be diminished.-Therefore, so far as. you el OGi5s. reorllect, no special exceptional coosideration was given d 990 to the question of stability whilst the alterations in the bh sar i- '.ice'dv sere under consideration ?-No, I think it would d -osc hae been quite mnnecessa-y-I may mention the ship di iud ivii; inolined to ascertain her centreof gravity v'hen ready M W,! for Sea. but I understand you to say no special previous tl i'chb, Calnulations had been made to your knowledge during the 37; lireparation of the ?? previously. w' tler Captain E lskien: Are you ableto state from knowledge U ginel since, o:r c.dclations made, whether the stability of ?? the ?? i was increased by the alterations made ?- fo ao- Vitness : No. I can only give a practical opinion. So ou ued. areas I could judge, without going into any scientific ex- pI. amiuation, by barely increasing her complement, the ur il;- stowage of provisions and water, and at the same time 72 e reducing hel inrmament, when she had three months' 18 was provisions ou board she had more weight in her, which ne the was placed lover in the vessel, than when she was em- wcl ired ployod as n man of-war, consequently I am of opinion that in iter. ter ataiitv was somewhat increased by the alteration. fa inrds The President: Is there any other information you can or uall. give likely to throw light as to her stability beyond what of yon have already stated ?-I have nothing further to add ar, bour respecting her stability. da the The Court then adjourned for luncheon. On re- in ic1 ed assembling, pC voel Mr. W. B. Robinson, Chief Constructor of Portsmouth ar The Dockyard, verified some Admiralty documents relating to OR o0e the snotaceutric height of the ERiv-dice, her centre of fe son gravity in oa0d condition, the probable position of her a -Way ecntre of gravity in 1854. drawing for her alterations re- tb hct comneneded by Captain Hare, a report on the extra stow- ec iled ago of inter, bringing it up to 105 tons, and also a report in eels of thf i rausa of stability of the Seajflerer and Liberty, ns ar cat- called for by Admiral Fanshawe. - qt sort The President : W1ere you eneaged at various times be- 9e )ard tween the beginning of 1875 ann May, 1877, in considering in Wa ii'sd ?? Out plane )which the A dmiralty hact ordered i ton afor st;iite tie Ciurtidiee as a training ship ?-Yes.-W¶ill hb clia vont satit to the Court in detail, referring to the orders you li ?? principal points you found it necessar to sh -onsider, and the alterations you recommended, describing -ider ?? Euch stiys as were taken to ensure the asail itinloenaluce of stability?-Mr. Robinson produced a tha7t letter setting forth the various alterations whibh l Vo oi were to be made to adapt the J9,orydicc to a to to t raining-bri", anil added that no proposals then tli mwade wre e ennsidered to affect the question of the Al ere s tability of the ship injuriously, Therecore no remarks th er ere mado upon the ?? the time the proposal WE it of and plans were transmitted were any other changes pro- l it of posed oradopted until Captain Hare's suggestions were TI ;tar maneaud the plans of February, 1877, drawn in accord- th 1ante With them after your inspection of them ?-I have no uite record of any, and I remember ?? there not k. afterwards ichile the ship was fitting out, an alteration est the made by which the sail rooms were removed and water- 55tanks stowrd in their p lace, the sails being stowed in bins wl on the lou-er deok, with the view to increasing the quan- ya the tity of water stowed on board V-The question of in- ad the creasicig the-quantity of water is referred to in Captain sj de flare's letter of the 15th February, 1877, and on March th .ght, 2nd the Comptroller of the Navy sent a letter stating that th the altoration vas made in view of the increased quantity tb re of water proposed by amended drawings just forwarded. th More than 63t tons should be carried if possible. Acon- as oula ?? galles could not be fltted. Then the Snider maga- oh rz Zinl. having boen placed further forward in what was part he cality ship agazine the space it was thought msuht to rica be utiliced for tanks. Aubsequently plane were aeat witl si i 'th following letter I- ?? ' ' ua I P~ortsmouth Yard,md 5Chief Constructor's Department, preoc 7th March, 187 7. cone e SIR,-W6 have the honour to 'for*tird het-ewith for mad y approval a plan of the hold of the Rurptdies, sbowixig prO- fore 1- posed altertios by' ?which 105 tons of watdr 'Viay be was ,e stowed. 'To effect this t is proposed to remove the sal-depi room from its present position and fix sail lookers in lieu, timet ~.as shown in plan of lower dock, on which they are built roeli to a height of threefeet. Estimtates previously forwarded and for alteration of -hold will moot this. .expq ?? havea the honour, do., Par] y W. B. ROBINSON,,Chief! Constructor, conE Lr J. ELLIO0T, Constructor. Raft Le That order carries the water uu to 105 tons but the Eury en i ir 'dice is stated to have stowed 114 tons.-I believe additional exi it room for tanks was focad, and she bad .thus aL greater tags 'e 'quautity ?? reckoning small and minor fit- by I ~.tinge, was any other alteration of weights made before the rep( r- ship was complete for sea?-I believe ?? you we- The rcollect if there Was a difference in .her ottablishment Sir 10 of boats ?? am not in any way Aware that the heats care kwere unusual for a ,shinp of her class.' In 1854 the )r seven boats were earnied, and' .in 1877 'nine.-WAS Oral id the EBuydice inclined to ascertain her centre of gravity' 'ascei !O af ter the alterations had been made, and her weights geot on dire is board?7-Yes. She was inclined ou the 9tih of ?Aay, ~1877. Mal id -Do you know what was, the, position of the Centre of 'Was sygaiythen ascertained 7-Yes ; from a ,drawing and beet 10le 't~ters already before th or.it was found-to had ,have beeon Oft. 4in. above the water-line when the ship was Tw; w in a fully-equipped condition and floating at a mean mar: as draught ofI Mt ?? you recently make a caleula- We: 6- tion for the information of the Court based upon the circ r-centre of gravity thus ascertained by inclination, to ascer- use& Is tamn approximately her former cenreo gavity y beci ot allowing for the moment all weigh~tsremoved or added ?? salti Yes, And the particulars are given in documents produced, -T jb$' which it may be seen that te ~robable position of the prek "It centre of gravity of the ship in i8n lhonfully ofipe, and e- was coincident with that mseae 87-stehighto n of the Centre of gravity 2ft. 4in. above the water-line, un- shir ausual 7-I think not, since the position of the Centre of it il gravity in relation to the whole depth of the ship should shi1 11be considered as well as the water-line. The EmVrdice the ul having a deep keel and hollow floor would naturally place who cc the centre of gravity high in relation to the water-line, gros of hearing in mind the comparatively small draught, of the maci le ?? not that occasion a high metacentre Also?- tamn at Under some conditions, ?? the metacentric height of mal the REvydice, is 4ft Bin., would that, considered with the and or centre of gravity, appear to you fevourablb to stability? sati Dd -1 consider it a fair heightm-1e it your opinion that the -11 to drawing of the curve of stability of the Eurydice sail] before the Court is a fair amount of stability?- ado' le I think so. I believe we have but two records of wooden shij sailing ships' curves of stability having been calculated, ebi1 ;a- and these are before the Court-those of the Seq flovier and she ir- Liberty. I have always board that the Seaqifeer and shot it Liberty have high characters as seagoing sailing vessels, istec id and from' all points of view the Eurydice', in my opinion, dlice lo pessesses qualit'ies assuring to her also the high character was rtwhich I believe she has Always ?? you coin- eale Lpare the curve ostblyofhetefletoer and Eurydice, it si -lo and say what difference you find between ?? Sea- the es ftovee'sc maximum height of stability is reached at 30 dogs., Cale re with a range of 72A, and the Euerydice'a mnaximumt is reached othi rt at 41, with a range' of 721 degredes, where her, stability sbij If ?? any reason to believe that any differ- cur toieonce existed between the stability of the .Eurydiee as a pro: to frigate, and the Eriuydiee as a training-ship ?? think epa ho none pracitically existed. I may say that in my own'tmind dire M. I hadl a doubt about the weight of iron rigging which the -o ht, shipI bad in her. last commission and the rope, of the former shiq as comumission,hut I resolved the doubt by actually weighing wat ac specimens of iron rope and hemupen. This experiment bore out the accuracy of the printed tables, which show abo rt, the iron rope to he somewhat Lighter than ?? gin aii you, for the information of this Court, make a detailed upt tre comparison between the weights removed, ani put on tea: an hoard during the alterations, beased upon the returns 211 ofl1 no for 1854 and 18777-Yes. The summary for 1854 showed shi all the total on the form 211 to he 850 tons" 7 cwt. The do- I re 'be duetions were 97 tons 4 ewt., making a correct total of imt rae 583 tons 3 cwt. The sumrmary for 1877 showed the die' 'to total, 452 tons 3 cwt.; additions, 12 tons S ewt.; All orottotal, 484 tons 8 ewt. Deducting that isE art from 513 tons 3ewt., and it left a dlifforeace of 88 tons car. do. 1 Sewt., which was equal to about St. inches displacement as: ag, at the ?? you believe that to be a close ap- Pc xre proximation to the weights actually on board at the two tat ad ?? close as can he ascertained from documents to mes which do not purport to be records of actual 'weights.-If shi the E~uyjdice had bior ordinary weights as'a training ship thi ale on board, hut had expended 1 8 days' provisions, and half get her water, but had 14 tons of extra stores placed at various sio The uncertain vertical distances below her centre of gravity, CD 2. 3 would her stability, in your opinion, he in any degree i re alf unduly compromised ?-I think ?? there any 101 :ler further obserpvations that you could make that you think be' the would he useful to the Court in considering the state of liv the the Euryd ice as to her stability ?-I do not now see that I lie dI a can make any useful observations further on the subject. wi he Captain Arthur : Would net the fact that the mean not draught of water in 187 7 was only II inches less than in r' her 1854 lead you to the belief that your estimate of the t rwave relative weights carried was tolerably accurate 7-Yes, cut He and I wonld, Add that all1 the comparisons of weights all iny referred to in my letter of 19th July were completed ine ide before it was observed hew nearly they checked the the draught of the ?? draught being the same, and occ the centre of gravity nearly eorrespandin; in each ease, t o: ck- would not the curve of stabhl be alost similar 7-Yes.- TI the Captain Davidson: Can you explain to us in general to: the terms as to the means by which the reduction of the lat ore weight of earcoameut and ammunition carried in the lat the Ew-yeldice, from 1 09 tons, in 18B54, to 218 tons, in 1 877, as on in the returns before the Court, was intended to he do Ind ?? full answer to this question will be fras found in papers and drawings before the Court teem co s. 6 which it will be seen that the powder, shot, Aan shell to oth belonging to the larger number of guns in 1854 gave a is ver ?? fgaiy it ith BnaiCddfrr-aldsadtegnofthe et: ',of Etrdc eescrda e ybigrni bard, to kle adhlinpsto.TeweesseueontedyOf one ?? tt utlh FOURTH DAY. WI 'get On the Court resuming yesterday (Friday) morning, at P saii a quarter to twelve, ra Liih MrW. B3 Robinson, Chief Constructor at Portsmlouth, e ide, was re-called. ' rare ThePresden: Intheforms 211 and the returns of sailing set qualities of the Eutrydice a difference appoarsof about 40 tons 4of ballast. From 1852 to 1854, or about between those dates,. the_ she has 69 tons18 cwt. shown. At all other times80 tons is of rho shown. Can youpoint out any reason for that difference? -Referring to my letter of the 19th July, 1878, on page 8, co tud-_I have given this explanatien : 1 In a booktr rer- found amongst other books in the Dockyard there th hasis entry, under the name Efirydice, '48 tons of a -PIas, sppiedi8th June, 1852, and returned into strea ilon 20th April, 1854.' This fact :may he explained byth 'No, circumstance that formerly ballast was put'on hoard ships m ieein ordinary to prevent them when otherwise light from hogn.The forty tons were probably included in the a uth 185 return an h culqanity carried was probablyA i the 28 tons 1 Bcwt. 3qrs. I, of course, mean that the 40 tons to ioct was probably included in error in the 1854 ?? the at' off:' custody of which department of the Doekyard was that Ihe book put, and dlo you know its office title ?-It was found ardbefore the sinking of the Eu,'yciee by an officer in my y the department among old records, which were ordered to be to !to examined with a view to useleis records being got rid of. fie the The records were in the store-house, and the book Was nr amre 1Ballast Beck,"!I believe. I do net knowwhetber a th the hook was destroyed; a produce iti eard, I can itifre uie, e th ?? in that or any other book is there a reco of that he Ia- ballast being returned in 18547-It would be in a store era'- note, but I am not aware of notes existing so ?? n the as far as the records in office show, the quantity of ballast b The alwaqys cartried by the Eury/dice when at sea, when in coin- all the nuesion, including her late commission as training-ship, tb also was 30 tons or thereabouts 7-Yes, I believe ?? oewas the general condition of the Eurtydiee as to repairs and W not fittings, and effeetivencess, so far as concerned the Con- dc ?? Department, when she passed out of the Dock- , yard~ hands in 18777?-She had just undergone a thorough t the repair at Mr. White's, at Coewe, and when she left Perks- to a of mouth in a complete state as a training-ship, she 'Was in u ert's every respect in good ?? you know whether H the the stowage of the ballast was altered, when fitted as a m end training-ship, from what it was previously 7-I believe do Lsed in both 1854 and 1877 the ballast was stowed as near as re are, possible similarly, and as low down as possible in the ship. U ot Captain Arthur: I observe in the returns of the reports ue mr f the sailing qualities of the Evrydies between 18B54 and n the 187 that the ballast is described as being stowed ?? r ited ?? ballast was stowed in the after pact of the tore to ti t hacha to the chain lockers, and two pigs abreast of the th Bncanlookers to the af ter part of the after hold." Would M nother decito apy equally to the stowage of the H. balat urn hr as cmision lea to th conco ;Vu o~jo n t-ti-h - a-on astesm in each cas ?-Th -i the drawings showing the ship's fittings shwteblat as su 'udbeing 30 tons, composed of ballast and iron limbers. The be hid daigdontsow the arrangement of the pigs of hal- d h last, and would not show the arrangement of the ballast.- be ady With reference to your answer, in which yoe state that an OUs there was a mean difforence of only 3j inches between her the draught as a frigate and a training vessel, will you say Pr whence you obtained the mean of the two draughts com- wc dge pared ?-The Court are under a misapprehension. In my an 0of letter of the 19th July, 1878,and the details regarding the fot , forms 211 for 1854 ?? 1877 I have endeavoured to point So out how conflicting statements on those forms can be ex- 0x- plained, and!I have pointed out that 97 tons 4 cwt. should the obably be deducted from the form 211 of 1854, and that E me i2 tons D cwt. should probably be added to the return of Mr ;hs' 1877, but that the draughts of water in 1854 and 17 ac ich nearly agree; there still is a difference of 13 tonsi B3 owt. fix tin- which cannot he accounted for. This equals atout 31 hn hat inches of draught of ?? comparison of th: L. forms 211 three draughts are given-two of 1854, wI can one of which is in red ink, and noted as the draught th, hat of boats and anehors stowed and powder not on board, eh add and another in black ink, which shows a slightly increased la draught. The third is the draught of 1877, also in red thi re- ink, dated 22und of May, in which it is noted that the ou powder, shot, and shell were on board. Which two of these th uth are the ones compared ?-It will be that in blaok ink in we to each ?? black ink one in 1854 shows a draught in of forward of ICf t. 3mu., and aft 17ft and that of 1877 gives a her a draughtforward of i Oft., and ?? lift. What would be wa re- the mean difference of the draught?-I would ask to no ow- correot my statement. The red ink wore the figures taken fom tort in 1854, and not the black ink ones, but there is but an inch as and a-half ?? on in your answer to a w' C question you state that the corrected total of weights we carried in 1854 was 503 tons 2ewt. 3qrs. 131bs. 'Does that bos . include her powder and shell, and is the powder and sihell Ca "Elincluded in the corrected total weight of 1877-viz., 484 re tons 9cwt. lqr. 1 9lbs. ?-In 1854 the powder was not on V ill board when the ship had a draught of 15f t. Ilin., and 17ft. ~ ho i., as stated at the end of the term. The powder and .o shell is included in that for 1877, ats also stated in the form. thf ng -Witness here produced the ballast book previously re- nai the ferred to. It was styled, "Iron ballast book," in which -t lo awas the following entry :-"1 Eurydice, 29 tons 1 Bewi. He a Oqr. 181bs. supplied 10th June, 1852. 280 pigs, at 7 tier col a ton, equal to 40 tons. Note-Returned into store 2uth fat on April, 1854." The history of the Eirtydlice, as supplied by Al t ks the Admiralty, was produced by the witness, and showed da sks that the ship was laid up in ordinary until 1850, when she an rsal was putin hand for small repairs until 1852, and was com- fos ,ro ioned in May, 1854, by Captain Erasmus Ommanney. ere That was when the ballast was returned out of the ship to I the Dockyard. not Mr. Nathaniel Barnaby, o.B., Director of Naval Con- un ion struction, was next called. ha' er- The President: It was stated by Sir Leopold MClintock, La ins who was Admiral Superintendent of Portsmouth Dook- vin an- yard when the alterations ini the Eurydice, frigate, to io in- adapt her as a training shipwcre considered, that the got si secial question of stability was especiaslly consieeda robth Comptroller's Office at the A rly ol o hat therefore inform the Court as to the steps taken to ensurer a i the maintenance of stability during the consideration of Th ad. those alterations ?The course taken for fitting the ship on- as a training ship was to rig her in the same manner as ga she had been rigged in her former commission: put in art her ?? same amount of permanet ballast as seie d had, e ht t redue the armament, and to bring her to about thea i ilk same'draught ofwater as she had ha before, by a larger I quanitity of provisins d rstos No ?? werei T made as to whbete the ship at her low draught would he piecisel th smea at any, given. period in a former Commne uru twas seed that ithle ohanig which wvere Ocn maecudntreduc the stability of the ship, or inter- 1H -fere with the proper performance ?? I iwee the nature -of the infotmation pessessed in your departmept as to the qualities of the. ship at and for the time she was selected ~as a, training. ?? the S7, Ireports of the various officers who had co~immanded her, o I and in particular we knew that the ship f ormed part of an of experimentalsuquadron in 1846, uinder Admairal Sir William lec Parker, and that in reporting on the Ships of that squadron, se consisting of the V7enpuard,Canopas, Alb~iin, Rodney, Queen, Ratefgit, Enrzidke ,partan, and~an stance, he reported that - on the 22na of - Aupist,! 1846, all, the shipis 'dispilayed I excellentsailing qualities 'and'stability, baitithe- odvan- pr r tage, was certainlj -with the BReleih, followed closely A - by the Raryjdioe.-_ id Admiral Parker-.make any other *I repr t of the 'Eurydice as to her'sailink, apalitls 2- -Thaeret are other reports in papers befor, te iurt from it I Sir William Parker, au4 from other: officers, and, from a A1 sacarefnl inspeetion'of 'them I can find nothing eontrary to o I the 'extrbet I' have qu ?? the Enrdijuie was fully R a rpae for se- sel ag training-ship, was she inclined, to r =,asetanthe position of -her cientre of gravity,under your in a ?? was inclined under my direetion on 1Itb in iMay; 1877, nob for the purpose of discovering whether she in ~was a stable, shipi, but as a matter of scientific~ interest, in I because, so far as I knew, no sailing frigate or larger Ship Ub i ~had ever hodn inclined in the history of the Royal Navy. to 6Two small ships, the Rover and $Scytt, had been inclined re a many years ago, but they were corvettes of Small ' size,- re - Was the fact of sailing ships not being inclined due to the II] 3circumsntance that~at the time purely sailing ships were p] -Mnsd in the Navy the practice of inclining had not in r been introduced, or was there anything. inherent in purely Be sailing ships which might render that process unnecessary? I -The reason must be the same as that which rules the bi 1B present practice in the Merchant Navy. There are about s I 5,000,000 tons of registered sailing ships in Great.Britaini, ox f and it is not the practice of any owners to inehie their gi ships, although the process is simple and inexpcnsive.-I5 I1 f it the practice of the Admiralty to incline. modern steam N i. ships which are rigged for ?? is the practice of Ii e the Admiralty to incline all modern and fiutried ships,t e whether rigged or net, the reason. being that there are qi great varieties of, form and disposition of -weights in it eamodern ships, and the designer sets before himself a cr- fc - tamn amount of stability as being desirable, in order to gi f make the new Ship as capable of beakrinig the Stress of sea i: eaand wind as other kniownx Ships which have given pi 2 Satisfaction to the officers who have tried them. ca e -Would you consider it proper in the case of any fuature r4 e sailing ships being fitted out to adopt the practice now tI -adopted by the Admiralty with reference to all modern Di a hips. or the practice in the Merohant Service P-If the I, ship Wvere new we should do ?? a matter of course. If t a she were an old and a tried ship like the Eunydice we 1 I should undoubtedly do it, for the purpose of adding to our t a, Stock of ?? curve of stability for the Eury- - d,(ice was calculated in your office for the use of this Court, t r was it not 2-The-curve of stability. for the Eur-ydice was x calculated in my office, bnt I am not sure of the date when V ',it was made. It is, however, now before the Court,-Using b ,-the term cuive of stability in its ordinary sense, are then calculations for it mad~e on the Supposition that no ports or T d other openings occur which will let in water through theI y ship's side 2-That is the ?? to the curve of stability of the Eurpdlice, a red line is drawn re- f a presenting what the curve would he if the ports were k open. Was thatdrawnt-oillus~trate the effect in the Eupi-y d dice in case of the ports being open?2-Yes; the two curvest .e -one in black and the other in red-sheov that when the d r ship is at her load line the lower port sills would enter the t g water at about 11 Sj degrees, and that the stability of the it ship would go on increasing if the ports were shut up to Wvabout 40 degrees. That is, her resistanice to inclination is a figa-owing resistance, while obviously the upsetting forcet d po the sailsisleeseniag. The facts may, perhaps, he illus- n trated Bbety saying that thb black curve belongs to a ship I of Ilift, or l2ft. freeboard, and the red curve belongs to a A shipxof 4ft. freeboard, the E~urydice being transformed e- fro one to the other by opening the Ice ?? you. Af inform the Court as to thre general condition of ?? ie dice when her outfit ways completed as a trainiuk-ehip, in a Fll that concerns the Comptroller's Department, so far as at is shown by the records there 2-Of my own knowledge II is can give no information. The ship was inspected as seenI at as she was complete by the late Commander-in-Chief at p- Portsmouth (Sir George Elliot), who -was her first Cap- vo tain, and the son of her designer, and we had every reason ts to believe, from his and the other official reports, that ther If ship had been cempletely fitted, and ?? ip there any other observations concerning the Stability or, I fgeneral efficiency of the EuiN-dice in her recent commis- as sion that you could make that would further instruct thet , Cur o these points ?-I would refer only to an extract ee f rem an official report made by the late Capt. flare on the 3y 1 Oth of June, 1877, in which he States that the ship bad ale been in three distinct gales of wind, but, although veryI of lively in a high tea, she had behaeved well, and that he be- ?? the alteration in weights had in no way interfered it. with her well-establishied qualities as to sailing. an Captain Jones: With half her water and three [weeks' in p revisions consumed, do you consider her stability would heecepmid - do not. She would have heeled Ds, mr oragvnpesrofsibtthat happens to its al hpadtepeieaon fthe difference IS be Cati apetr oldnttesme 'difference ndocrudrtoecniin nhad the Eurpdice in her se, f ormer commission as in'th prsn -Undoubtedly. - The only differnc Ospposabl bewen the ship in mal former condition n in hera ?? in a givenl time a he larger asooint of water would havebe consumed in her ,he last commission, but the difference in behaviour as stores as on board her were consumed must have been alway ecvi- be dent to the officer in command. be The President:- Assuming that three tens of water were amn consumed daily,naaking in 13 days 54 tons, and applying that ell to her former stowage of water, which was 90 tons, which )a is loes than two-thirds of the entire Stowage, do you con- eider that would represent an extreme or very exceptional ,he State of thingse03hcbard a sailing, man of-war-re -erring rd, to the time when the Navy was composed of sailing mnen- lay of-war ?-I should nob think it an extreme or exceptional state of things. Captain Erskine: Supposing the quantity of provisions. water, and stores consumed en the passages home frem at rudawa approximately ascertained, could not a ahe ade Showing very accurately the actual lb a~le f hr sablity at the moment that she foundered, a pom hr e ports to have been closed 2-Yes, un- ~ouho~y an weshould have made that calculation for ng asifraino the Court if we could have got the Mo ciats. as,.- Captain Davidson:; Is ityour opinion that the difficulty lis of a very extensive reduction of the Eurydice's previous as? apparently very heavy armament was Satisfactorily over- 8, Icome as regards weights when she was converted into a I trainin shi& ?-I do not precisely understand the force of ) the worde d~ci lt, but my answer would he tint when the of armament -was ch anged the other changes made at the )re same time left the ship on the whole better off in the h~e matter of stability than she had been before. 1P The Court then adjourneil for luncheon. On to- 'e assemblngjo Rloherteon Bonstead, of the Indian usy Army, said on the 24th March he crossed from. Portsmouth n to Hyde between 3.15 and 4 p.m., in one of the Hyde h Steamboats, and he encountered the squall in which the sat Eurydicawas lost. The stormneame on ?? nd apparently without any warning. It seemed to strik othe nyvessel he was in with a blow. He remembered that the be force of the wind was such that it powdered the snow- Of. flakes to dust. The snow fell in blinding sheets, end las nothing could be seen while it lasted. Its duration was ior about ten minutes or a quarter of an hour. It took the .-vessel he was in quite aback. A few hours afterwards he iat heard that a man-'wear had gone down off the Isle of 'l Wight, with all ?? you observe anything peouliar -1intestate of the sky 2-Yes; it became suddenly very let black and overcast. That appearance presented itself P' almost immediately before the storm broke. It cause, he 'Pi thought, from N. and by W., a little more N. The wind iab was blowcing in sudden gusts in all directions, nd Staff-Cornanaer Win. Lamb Dodds U.N., said he was in- don uy as master attendant at termuda, when the Irdoing dubas there. He was last on hoard the Eourydice gl 1ther'oafew minutes before she left thebharbour. The shbip ko- took in provisions and water at Bermuda and was at her in usual flotation and trim when they haa been taken in. ior Ho had had opportunities of witnessing the ship's comple- I a ment under very disagreeable circumstances, viz., on Sun- ve~ day night, March 3rd, at 11 .0 p.m., it became necessary to .sreseenre the ship in consequence Of a, gale having sprung uP. veysdel.Tengtws very dark, and it was rtd ncsaytlaouhevhaeracss the camber to n lpeeth esldrfigo h ok side of the came- be.TeAeetusepoe-ni three o'clock the ire 1 wmonnadithmehad not worked well ?? out without any d hitch. The 'daty was very well carrier out. ie He had had other opportunities of observing the ships b- company, and the opinion which he formed as to the diei- e phlne and order of ?? was that she was a complete success as a training ship, and that her young seamen would h e be a welcome addition to the naval forces at home. The l discipline and order of the ship's company could nothave - been better. The officers were most proud of their ship at and of her doings during her cruise. er The Court then ?? doing so, the ay President announced that to-day (Saturday) Mr. Robinson n- would be rc-ealledto be examined as to one or two matters, cy and then the evidence would close, and the Court adjourn nt for deliberation. x- THE OPERATIONS AT THE WRECK. Id The pumping operations were begun on board the ?? at even o'clock on Wednesday night, but mainly for the purpese of testing the pumps, the 77 actual attempt to pump her out havinb been Vt. fixed for Thursday morning. She soon became buoyant and lively, and as the great weight of thick mud on the port side still retained its positon MI when the ship was canted over to starboard and hdt thus more than counterbalanced the weight of the guns, d, she would have toppled over again on her port bilge ea had measures not beeu taken to prevent it. For some time hd the pumps gained upon the water, but soon they pumped he out nothing but clean water, from which it appeared that ao there were still extensive leakages. The operations in were then stopped. The holes extend over 30 feet ht in length on the port bilge, and one fracture covers es a space of 8f1. by 6ft. The dash and rush of the be water inside had bulged the stoppings eutward, which tonow require to be straightened and strengthened, besides en forcing out thecoalsum can~kig. On rl'huriday morn- oh ing there was half-a-gale blowing ont ?? the ship, ta which strained her very much, and so darkened the .5a water that the divors could not see below. Eight nmoi-e at bodies have been recovered since the ship was turned over. 14Cto igoertoswr otiudysedy t.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002745/18780831/046/0005
North Briton
Saturday 31 August 1878

p5
THE LOSS OF THE EURYDICE. COURT-MARTIAL AT PLYMOUTH.

On Tuesday an inquiry into the loss of H.M.S. Eurydice was opened on board the Duke of Wellington flagship, Portsmouth. Admiral Fanshawe, C.B., Commander-in-Chief, Portsmouth, presised, and there was a full attendance of officers. The Eurydice, sailing frigate, was lost off Dunnose Point, Isle of during a sudden violent squall, on Sunday, the 24th March last, when on her homeward voyage from the West Indies. The two survivors gave their evidence before the coroner at Ventnor. A court-martial was opened by the Admiralty, to be held on the survivors, Benjamin Cuddeford and Sydney Fletcher, seamen, but this is only formal, and a scientific inquiry will follow as to the construction of the ship, and her condition at the time of her loss. Depositions as to the loss of the ship were read.— Benjamin Cuddeford stated in evidence that he had been at sea 21 years, and he was on board the Eurydice about 14 months. He had been an able seaman for 14 years. On board the Eurydice he was at first captain's coxwain, and at the time of the accident he was second captain of the quarter deck. It was his afternoon watch on the 24th of March, but, as was customary in the Eurydice on a Sunday, the men on watch were allowed to remain below until wanted for duty. He was on deck nearly the whole of the afternoon of the 24th of March. He saw Captain Hare on deck at 12.30, and at ten minutes past two. He saw him again on deck just after half-past three. At the latter time he was on the bridge. Soon after the watch to which the witness belonged came on duty, an order was given to set starboard studding sails, and more sail was subsequently set. Just after half-past three the watch was called to shorten sail, and this was done. He could not now remember who was officer of the watch on this afternoon. It was to Mr Randolph, sub-lieutenant, that the captain give the ceders to take in upper sails and order the men down from aloft. The captain was carrying on duty at the quarter-deck, and the officer of the watch on the forecastle, where he had been sent by the captain to assist in taking in the lower studding sail. From 12.30 P.M. to 2.10 P.M., when the lower studding sail was set, a moderate breeze was blowing, and he noticed no difference until the squall came on. The ship was under all plain sail at 12 o'clock and at 12.30 topmast studding sails were set, and later on theslower studding sails. When the log was hove, just after the lower studding sail was set, the ship was going at eight and a half knots. The lower studding sail was taken in on account of the increasing wind, but when forward he did not notice that the fore topmast studding sail boom was "complaining." Had it been so he must have noticed it. The captain did not name the up sails which were to be taken in. He gave the order quickly "Watch, in upper sails. Some of the topgallantyard men went aloft, but he could not say how many. The captain immediately called them down again, and the ship was at once struck by the squall and heeled over. At that time the ship was going about 12 knots an hour. The order to put the helm up was given by the captain, and the Hon. Mr Giffard, a sub-lieutenant, rushed aft to help to execute it, but he could not say if the helm was put up or down. He never noticed that the ship's head was altered at all. As seaman, he considered everything was done in a seamanlike manner to prevent danger to the ship. Nothing was done which was likely to cause danger. There was a life-buoy on each side of the bridge, two in each boat, and life-belts in the cutter for her crew. He could not say if the lower deck scuttles were out that afternoon or not. He knew of no order for the Eurydice to close the main deck ports in bad weather or at fixed times. All the deck pors were open except two on each side. On the afternoon of the catastrophe the sashes of the ports were not shipped. Those which were not open had guns in them. The ship completed provision-taking at Bermuda, but he did not know how much she took in. The provisions and the water were taken in at the last moment. Stores were taken in for conveyance to England, amongst them being wire rigging. When the tanks of the Eurydice were empty they were not filled with salt water. Restrictions were made on the issue of water for washing purposes, and this made a great saving in water.

On Wednesday evidence was taken as to atmospheric phenomena observed between three and four o clock on the afternoon of the 24th March. The evidence showed that two squalls, accompanied by snow, followed rapidly after each other, the effect of the first being to deceive experienced men as to the nature of the second, which struck the Eurydice and caused her to founder. Both squalls lasted generally 15 minutes, and the sun shone brightly h before and after the disaster. Dismantling operations showed that several sails were loosened before the ship foundered.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780905/089/0005
Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 05 September 1878

p5

JUDGMENT OF THE EURYDICE COURT MARTIAL

The Deputy Judge Advocate gave the following judgment at the opening of tho court on Monday morning.

1. — At a Court-Martial assembled on board of the Duke of Wellington flagship, in Portsmouth Harbour, on Aug.27, 1878, to inquire into the loss of her Majesty's ship Eurydice, pursuant to the 91st and 92nd section of the Naval Discipline Act, 1886, do find that her Majesty's ship Eurydice foundered on the afternoon of March 24, 1878, by pressure of wind upon her sails during a sudden and exceptionally dense snowstorm which overtook her when its approach was partially hidden by the proximity of the ship to high land.

2. – Some of the upper half ports on the main deck were open at the time, which materially conduced to the catastrophe; but the court consider that the upper half ports having been open, was justifiable and usual under the state of wind and weather up to the time of the occurrence of the storm.

3. – The Court are of opinion that no blame is attributable to anyone. The captain was frequnetly on the deck during the afternoon, and personally carrying on the duty before and at the time the squall struck her.

4. – The Court are further of opinion, from documentary evidence that due consideration was given to the stability of the Eurydice when the dodges for her coustruition were decided upon and carried out.

5. – They are also convinced, by the official reports of ail the captains who commanded her as a 26-gun frigate, embracing a period of nearly ten years' sea service, and by a special report from Admiral Sir William Parker. on the occasion of her being tested against other ships of various descriptions, that the Eurydice was a ship possessing good qualities of stability up to the time that she was selected for adaptation as a training ship, nod that when the necessary alterations were completed in May, 1877, she was in every respect an efficient ship, and the evidence shows that her stability was maintained. The Court do fully acquit the survivors, Benjamin Cuddeford, able seaman, and Sydney Fletcher, ordinary seaman ; and the said Benjamin Cuddeford and Sydney Fletcher are hereby so fully acquitted accordingly.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780905/089/0005

Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 05 September 1878

p5

JUDGMENT OF THE EURYDICE COURT MARTIAL

The Deputy Judge Advocate gave the following judgment at the opening of tho court on Monday morning.

1.— At a Court-Martial assembled on board of the Duke of Wellington flagship, in Portsmouth Harbour, on Aug. 27, 1878, to inquire into the loss of her Majesty's ship Eurydice, pursuant to the 91st and 92nd section of the Naval Discipline Act, 1866, do find that her Majesty's ship Eurydice foundered on the afternoon of March 24, 1878, by pressure of wind upon her sails during a sudden and exceptionally dense snowstorm which overtook her when its approach was partially hidden by the proximity of the ship to high land.

2.– Some of the upper half ports on the main deck were open at the time, which materially conduced to the catastrophe; but the court consider that the upper half ports having been open, was justifiable and usual under the state of wind and weather up to the time of the occurrence of the storm.

3.– The Court are of opinion that no blame is attributable to anyone. The captain was frequently on the deck during the afternoon, and personally carrying on the duty before and at the time the squall struck her.

4.— The Court are further of opinion, from documentary evidence that due consideration was given to the stability of the Eurydice when the designs for her coustruition were decided upon and carried out.

5.– They are also convinced, by the official reports of ail the captains who commanded her as a 26-gun frigate, embracing a period of nearly ten year' sea service, and by a special report from Admiral Sir William Parker, on the occasion of her being tested against other ships of various descriptions, that the Eurydice was a ship possessing good qualities of stability up to the time that she was selected for adaptation as a training ship, and that when the necessary alterations were completed in May, 1877, she was in every respect an efficient ship, and the evidence shows that her stability was maintained. The Court do fully acquit the survivors, Benjamin Cuddeford, able seaman, and Sydney Fletcher, ordinary seaman ; and the said Benjamin Cuddeford and Sydney Fletcher are hereby so fully acquitted accordingly.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000170/18780907/006/0004?browse=true

Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 07 September 1878

p4-5

THE EURYDICE

The court martial, at which the two survivors from the Eurydice were placed *pro forma* on their trial, has ended in their honourable acquittal, which, of course, was only to be expected. The court likewise declares that " no blame is attributable to any one." It is always a task repugnant to the sensitive mind to attach any blame to the dead, knowing that they cannot defend themselves ; and, in this instance, all those responsible for the disaster have paid for any error of judgement with their lives. Still we imagine that there are few persons acquainted with nautical matters who will altogether endorse the finding of the court, more especially among the seafaring population who witnessed the vessel just before the sad catastrophe which has been so much commented on. The Ventnor boatmen on the beach could see the squall coming, and, as the vessel passed off that town, several were heard to say, " That fellow has too much sail." How, then, are we to reconcile the fact of their perceiving the approach of stormy weather, and numerous other craft near passing through it without damage, with a finding that practically says the accident was unavoidable? Every person who remembers the storm, and who has read the evidence respecting it will be ready to admit that it was of exceptional severity, and that the accident was owing to the violent wind catching the sails when the lee ports were open. But there cannot be the slightest doubt that if Capt. Hare had kept his ports closed the sad event would not have happened, because then the ship would have righted directly after the one sharp gust was over. Here was one precaution neglected, and a very simple one. But, again, to our mind there can be no doubt that with a falling barometer the Eurydice was carrying too much sail. Had Capt. Hare but reduced it ever so little we should never have heard of the accident. Neither should we if he had ordered the ports to be closed. Here were two simple precautions, which might reasonably be expectedly to be carried out, but neither of which were attended to. He the land not been so closely hugged there could have been no excuse that it was impossible to perceive the storm coming. If, however, the Ventnor boatmen could see it as the Eurydice passed off that town, we cannot help thinking that it ought to have been seen on board the ill-fated ship. We must say, therefore, that we think blame attached somewhere, though of course we do not deny that there were many extenuating circumstances. The ship had just braved the dangers of an ocean voyage, and it was hard for the crew to believe that the greatest peril was to be first met on the threshold, as it were, of their own homes. They were anxious to get into harbour to see friends and I relatives again, as we can well understand, and a storm of such suddenness and force is not often met with in these waters. But there are hundreds of merchant ships who are daily met by the same conditions, and this is no excuse for reckless disregard of every elementary precaution. One of the London papers — the *Times*— argues that a constant regard for petty precautions is not to be expected from the captains of H.M.'s Navy, and, if encouraged, would be destructive of the spirit for which our seamen have always been distinguished. This may be true to a certain extent in war time, and we trust our Naval commanders will never be deficient in the courage aun spirit which has caused them to defy all dangers in their efforts to carry the British flag triumphant in every sea. Still, in peace, with none of the exigencies and hurry which are inseparable from a state of hostilities, there is no reason why our naval commanders should not be quite as cautious as the captains of ordinary trading vessels, more especially as they have more lives dependent upon their prudence and forethought.

TH: notable quote: "The ship had just braved the dangers of an ocean voyage, and it was hard for the crew to believe that the greatest peril was to be first met on the threshold, as it were, of their own homes. They were anxious to get into harbour to see friends and I relatives again, as we can well understand, and a storm of such suddenness and force is not often met with in these waters."

TO DO: Times quote re: safety etc?


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000072/18780907/018/0004
Illustrated Police News
Saturday 07 September 1878

p4

THE " EURYDICE."

The evidence at the "Eurydice " court-martial was closed on Saturday. A diver named Sutherland deposed to finding the scuttle on the lower deck closed; and Mr. W. D. Robinson, Chief Constructor at Portsmouth Yard, produced calculations, showing that in her last commission the " Eurydice " had fourteen tons less ballast than when sailed as a frigate. The fact that ninety tons of provisions had been consumed when she capsized would not compromise her stability to any serious degree if she was properly handled. Of course, under a loss of weight in the lower part of the ship she would necessarily have less stability. The officer managing her would know this, and, therefore, press her correspondingly less with sail. He should call this proper handling. The consumption of ninety tons of stores, provisions, and water would reduce the draught of the " Eurydice" by 9 in. There was nothing unusual in this reduction. Cuddeford was then asked by the Court whether he had anything to add before the evidence was closed, and he made a statement which he wished should be entered on the minutes. He desired it to be known that the crew loved and respected Captain Hare, in whom they had undoubted confidence, knowing that as a sailor he was surpassed by none. He had the love and respect of every officer and man in the ship, whose comfort and happiness he studied in every way. The men were proud of their captain, proud of their officers, and proud of their ship, which was admirably adapted to the service in which she was employed. Fletcher stated that he could add nothing to what Cuddeford had stated. The Court deliberated for over three hours, and adjourned until Monday, when the judgment of the Court was pronounced. They were of opinion that the ship foundered in a sudden and exceptionally dense snow storm on March 24, by pressure of wind on sails, and that the upper half ports being justifiably open, considering the state of the previons wind and weather, naturally conduced to the catastrophe. No one is to blame, the captain being frequently on deck, and carrying on duty before and at the time the squall struck her. The Court is further of opinion that the stability was maintained after her adaptation as a training-ship, and that after alteration in May, 1877, she was in every respect an efficient ship. They fully acquit the two survivors. Cuddiford and Fletcher.

The work of clearing out the "Eurydice" commenced on Monday, and as soon as it can be done the ship is to be brought into dock to have a thorough overhaul. The wreck has been the attraction for numerous excursion parties, and the authorities have great difficulty in preserving the ship intact, so eager are persons to carry away pieces of wood as momentos of the sad calamity.

---


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18780904/003/0002
Hampshire Telegraph
Wednesday 04 September 1878
p2

PORTSMOUTH, WEDNESDAY. SEPTEMBER 4.

We shall soon have heard the last of the ill-fated Eurydice. The finding of the Court-martial was generally anticipated by the public, and it is understood that the bringing of the vessel into harbour will be quickly followed by her breaking up. The catastrophe of the 24th of March last was one of the darkest in the annals of the British Navy, and yet it is apparently destined to leave only the shadow of a sad memory behind. It has been said that the first impulse of our countrymen after any great disaster is to " hang somebody." This temper has been a good deal satirised, and yet it has to a large extent a strictly logical foundation. The scientific mind is slow to ascribe anything to pure accident. A catastrophe may have been unforeseen, but it is generally discovered on investigation that its cause is perfectly intelligible, and such as extreme vigilance might have detected, and consequently avoided. When the sad intelligence of the foundering of the Eurydice was first made known, we expressed the opinion that fearful as were all the circumstances surrounding the loss of the vessel, it would be still more terrible were the conclusion to be reached, after mature deliberation, that the cause of the disaster was a complete mystery. The verdict of the first Coroner's Jury, which exonerated everybody from blame, was clearly not entitled to serious attention. No scientific or technical evidence was taken, and a single sitting sufficed for the inquiry. This cannot be said of the recent Court-martial, which, arriving at the same conclusion, has spent a working week in its attempt to elucidate the mystery. The finding of the Court may be divided into two parts-first, that which relates to the stability of the ship ; and secondly, that which concerns her handling at the time she went down. On the first point there appears to be no ground for any difference of opinion. Admitting the incompetence of all but experts to deal with the technicalities of the subject, it cannot be said to require any special knowledge to judge of the value of the evidence bearing upon this branch of the inquiry which was laid before the Court-martial. The Eurydice had always the reputation of being a good sailor, and it must now be regarded as beyond dispute that her conversion from a frigate into a training-ship in no degree diminished her stability. It is true the question of her stability was not specially considered when the plans for her conversion were originally under discussion, but this was only because the proposed changes were obviously such as to require no examination on this point. Since his attention has been particularly directed to this subject, Mr. Barnaby has come to the conclusion that the Euryjdice rather gained than lost in stability by her conversion, and Mr. W. B. Robinson is of the same opinion. Whatever, then, was the cause of the catastrophe it cannot be attributed to any positive or even comparative defects in the ship herself.

This should lead us to examine the other branch of the subject all the more closely. If the Eurydice foundered from no inherent fault of her own, was there anything in her handling on the fatal Sunday afternoon which caused the terrible result? The Court-martial declares that there was not, and yet the very language of the finding raises doubts which cannot, and honestly speaking, ought not to be suppressed. The immediate cause of the catastrophe was, of course, the sudden storm which for a few minutes raged with cyclonic fury, but as other vessels rode it out in safety some further explanation is obviously required. This is, in effect, acknowledged by the Court, which proceeds to say that " some of the upper ports on the main deck were open at the time, which materially conduced to the catastrophe," though the important addition is made that this step " was justifiable and usual under the state of the wind and weather up to the time of the actual occurrence of the storm." Here we reach the very root of the whole inquiry. Did the state of the weather really permit of such confidence as was displayed on board the Eurydice? The barometer had been falling for a couple of days or more, while the indications of a coming storm, though it may be " partially hidden," as the verdict recites, " by the proximity of the ship to high land," was so far apparent that the order to shorten sail had already been given and was actually in process of being obeyed. Is it wrong or uncharitable, under these circumstances, to surmise that the course pursued amounted to an error of judgment? It was impossible to anticipate the altogether exceptional fury of the gale, but would not the exercise of a little caution have made all the difference between entire safety and utter destruction? "It must be understood," observes the Times, in dealing with this part of the case, " that in the naval service a creeping servitude to caution would be intolerable." This principle is no doubt admirable in the exigencies of actual warfare, but it cannot be said to have any application to a vessel when simply making for port and within sight of "home." To suppose otherwise would be to infer that the commander of the Eurydice and his gallant companions knew the risk they were running, and were determined to brave it at all hazards. Fortunately no such foolhardy intention can be attributed to them. That each man did his duty according to his lights will be admitted by the most exacting of critics. What is not so certain is that the soundness of judgment exhibited on this occasion was of apiece with that courage and indomitable resolution which the British sailor evinces in every emergency.


---


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780907/016/0006
Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 07 September 1878
p6

THE EURYDICE COURT MARTIAL. THE JUDGEMENT.

The court re-assembled on Monday morning at at 10 o'clock, and was formally opened at half-past 12, when the Judge Advocate-General of the Fleet read the following judgment :

At a court martial assembled on board of the Duke of Wellington, flagship, in Portmouth Harbour, on the 27th of August, 1878, to inquire Into the loss of Her Majesty's ship Eurydice, pursuant to the 91st and 92nd section of the Naval Discipline Act, 1866, composed of the following officers- Admiral Fanshawe, C.B., Commander-in-Chief, Portsmouth, president; Captains the Hon. W. C. Carpenter, Duke of Wellington; Messrs. T. M. Jones, Asia; W. Arthur, Vernon ; J. E. Erskine, Boadicea; E Kelly, Cyclops; D. G. Davidson, Serabis; E J. Brownrigg, Euphrates; G Parsons, Jumna ; and Mr. G. P. Martin, Deputy Judge-Advocate of the Fleet, and adjourned from day to day (Sunday excepted) until Monday, September 2, the court, pursuant to an order from the Commissioners for executing the office of Lord High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland, proceeded with the trial of the said Benjamin Cuddiford and Sydney Fletcher, of Her Majesty's ship Eurydice, and taking their evidence, and the other evidence they deemed necessary, and having deliberately weighed and considered the whole, do find that Her Majesty's ship Eurydice foundered on the afternoon of the 24th March, 1878, by pressure of wind upon her sail during a sudden and exceptionally dense snowstorm which overtook her when the approach was partially hidden by the proximity of the ship to high land.

2. Some of the upper half ports on the main deck were open at the time, which materially conduced to the catastrophe; but the court consider that the upper half ports having been open was justifiable and usual under the state of wind and weather up to the time of the actual occurrence of the storm.

3. The court are of opinion that no blame is attributable to any one. The captain was frequently on the deck during the afternoon, anel personally carrying on the duty before and at the time the squall struck her.

4. The court are further of opinion, from documentary evidence, that due consideration was given to the question of the stability of the Eurydice when the designs for her construction were decided upon and carried out.

5. They are also convinced, by the official reports of all the captains who commanded her as a 26-gun frigate embracing a period of nearly ten years' sea service, and by a special report from Admiral Sir William Parker on the occasion of her being tested against other ships of various descriptions, that the Eurydice was a ship possessing good qualities of stability up to the time that she was selected for adaptation as a training ship, and that when the necessary alterations were completed in May, 1877, she was in every respect an efficient ship, and the evidence shows that her stability was maintained.

The court do fully acquit the survivors, Benjamin Cuddiford, able seaman, and Sydney Fletcher, ordinary seaman, and the said Benjamin Cuddiford and Sydney Fletcher are hereby so fully acquitted accordingly. The court then dissolved.

The Eurydice was towed into Portsmouth Harbour on Sunday, the leaks having been to a great extent closed, and the water pumped out until she drew only two feet more than her proper draught. The ill-fated vessel, which has been laid up alongside the old hulk Laurel in Portehester Creek, a continuation of Portsmouth Harbour, continues to be the centre of attraction. The wreck so recently recovered from the deep is, however, zealously guarded by a detachment of Marines, until the work of clearing out has been finished. The entire centre of the upper deck is washed away through the violence of the waves during the time the wreck lay in Sandown Bay. The planks placed crosswise form a means of communication from one part of the upper deck to the other. On going below a scene of chaotic confusion presents itself. Most of the gear has been removed from the main deck and many of the cabins are knocked away, but the deck is still littered with the broken spars and rigging. The lower deck is littered with *debris* from end to end, and the whole is covered with a muddy slime several inches deep. Officers' chests, men's clothes bags, beer barrels, bird cages, pickle bottles, surgical cases and instruments, which have fallen from the adjacent dispensary, lie upon the deck, a heterogeneous and confused mess. Locomotion between decks in consequence of the quantity of mud which  has been washed in is extremely difficult. The main-mast, the lower, part of which still remains in the ship, was hoisted up out of the vessel, a distance of nearly six feet, by the bumping action to which the vessel was subjected. The starboard side of the lower deck has also been considerably lifted owing to the action of the sea. Right aft, on the lower deck is situated the bread room, from which a most intolerable stench proceeded from the decomposed bread and other provisions, notwithstanding the fact that the decks are continually washed by carbonic acid. The captain's cabin has been entirely removed. On the lower deck are several cells, in one of which a prisoner was found, minus his head. The poor fellow was not chained, but another one at large on the lower deck was. The irons hay been found near the mainmast, but no body. The hold is at present impossible to get down into owing to the fact that all the movable gear near the spot has been rolled into them and choked them up. In making room for the suction pipes to go down between the lumber into the hold the divers came across a body jammed in, and supposed to be that of the bread room boy. Several articles of uniform clothing lie scattered about the lower deck, amongst which was a decent undress uniform coat. The working party came across a skull, but no more bodies. In case the vessel should meet with any untoward accident, anchors have been laid out from her, so that in case the necessity should arise she can be immediately hauled up on to the mud. One of the steam engines got to work periodically continues to be sufficient to keep the water under. As soon as possible, the work of clearing out the ship, a labour of considerable magnitude, will be concluded, and the vessel fumigated and brought into port ; but this is not likely to take place for at least a fortnight.

