
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18900201/076/0006

Isle of Wight County Press and South of England Reporter
Saturday 01 February 1890
p6

WRECK OF A LARGE SAILING SHIP NEAR THE NEEDLES

SUFFERINGS OF THE CREW

SIX LIVES LOST

SPLENDID RESCUE OF THIRTY MEN BY THE ROCKET APPARATUS EXCITING SCENES NARRATIVES OF THE SURVIVORS

One of the most disasterous wrecks which have occurred for many years on the Island coast took place on Saturday night, when the full-rigged ship Irex ran on shore, under stress of weather, in Scratchell's Bay, off the Needles Battery. The Irex was new steel-built full-rigged ship, of 2248 tons register, with a crew of 36 hands all told, commanded by Captain Hutton, on her first voyage with a cargo 3600 tons of iron sewerage pipes for Rio Janiero. She was owned by Capt. Clink and others. We have received the following accounts from our correepondenta :

[From our Totland Bay Correspondent.]

On receipt of telegram about ten o'clock on Sunday morning at the Coastguard Station, Totland Bay, from Hurst Castle Signal Station, informing the officer that a ship near the Needles was in want of the lifeboat, the usual rockets were fired and mounted messenger was at once despatched to summon the boat's crew. While preparations were being made for the launching of the lifeboat, small bodies of men were already to be seen wending their way toward Scratchell's Bay, the scene of the wreck, and by the time that the launch was effected some 200 persons had assembled on the cliffs overlooking the Bay. The lifeboat was taken in tow by the outward-bound steam collier Hampshire. The captain of the Hampshire, on hearing the lifeboat rockets, although he had proceeded nearly as far as the Needles, immediately got back to render an invaluable and most praiseworthy service. Steaming out at about half-speed the Hampshire rounded the Needles Lighthouse at a quarter to twelve, and this brought the crew in sight of fine new steel three-master, the Irex.

STRANDED IN SCRATCHELL'S BAY.

The collier esill proceeded with the lifeboet in tow until 12.25, when the boat was out adrift, and she pulled away with a ready stroke. However, after 20 minutes' rowing, the red flag, which denotes danger, was seen flying from her bow, and soon afterwards she was taken in tow by the Hampshire again. During this time the crowd on the ciiffs had considerably increased, and the general impression was that the lifeboat had come too far leeward and that another attempt was about to be made to gain the vessel from the windward. She left the collier the second time at 1.30, and as she did not get near the vessel in the first attempt, but turned back, all interest in the lifeboat seemed to drop and the keenest attention was paid to

THE ROCKET APPARATUS,

which had arrived in the meantime from Freshwater Bay. It is noteworthy that the apparatus arrived on the downs outside the Needles Fort exactly at one o'clock, and through the excellent management of the officer in charge (Mr, Spilman) the necessary arrangements had been made with the military authorities, and the first rocket was fired from the inside of the Fort at 1.10. It was splendid shot, fired by Coastguard Ballet. The rope went clear over the fore yardarm, it was then carried to the foretop by one of the ship wrecked crow, and from that time the whole ship seemed to be alive with men coming forward to the assistance of the one or two who were in the fore rigging. The deck was being

SWEPT WITH HEAVY SEAS

from stern to stem, and it was impossible for the men to get forward along the dock, so they had to proceed by way of the rigging, the men aft going from the mizzen top to mizzen-top-gallant stay, from there to main-top, and from main top to main-top-gallantstay to fore top. After sufficient strength had collected at fore-yard a haul was made at the rocket line, and by 2.40 the double whip was lashed and the hawser was soon being pulled toward the ship, and it had been made fast to the mast by quarter-past three—just about two hours after the rocket had been fired. This time had not been idly spent on shore. Through the great distance of the ship from the cliff, together with the height of the cliff, about 400 feet, it was apparent that there would not be rope enough with the apparatus, but through the kind permission of Major Playfair, every available yard of rope was placed at the disposal of Mr. Spilman, whose men were busily engaged making long splices as fast it was possible, every man using the utmost power to expedite matters. At one time it was found that the hawser had become fastened under rock at the bottom of the cliff, and a coastguard named Mayo at once descended, but only arrived at the bottom in time to see the rope freed by the combined energies of the workers on the top. This result did not, however, make his gallant attempt any the less brilliant. After the hawser had been tightened and as the cradle was nearing the ship for the first time lad was seen, in his attempt to get forward, to fall from the rigging on the deck, which was covered with water. He responded, but afterwards came down on deck only to be washed over board.

THE ROCKET AT WORK.

The first man left the ship five minutes to four, and the sight of his coming along inspired the workers to raise real heartfelt cheer, the poor fellow, named John Niceolls, being safely housed at four o'clock. Ample provision for the comfort of the rescued men was made in the Fort by Master Gunner Lloyd, who is in charge of the Needles Battery. Good fires were made in all the rooms, and beds, with well-aired blankets, were arranged down both sides the large room, which presented the appearance of hospital ward. Dr. Dean was in attendance, and as each man was brought in examined him and gave the necessary instructions befitting each case. The second man to arrive was in a terrible plight, one arm and one leg being broken, and his case received the kindliest attention from Dr. Dean, who attended personally to the sufferer's requirements. This poor man was soon followed another with broken leg and injured head, and ha too received the utmost attention. The rescue work was still proceeding under great inconveniences, the gale, which had now become a complete hurricane, making operations most difficult. The wind drove shingle and of chalk with such violence into the eyes and faces the rescuers that at times it was almost impossible to see; still there was no lack energy, and under the careful, cheering, and most skilful directions of Mr. Spilman, every man worked with will and with perfect confidence in successful issue. His cheery, "Pull away lads, we're life saving," worked wonders, and more than once helped fagged-out one to hang on again. So the work went on. One by one the men were hauled ashore, and at five o'clock seven were saved and their several wants attended to. Messengers were despatched to Totland Bay for more necessaries, and the good supply of bread and meat, butter, Brand's essence, Liebig's extract, &c., was much appreciated. As night was drawing on the crowd on the cliff dwindled down and the helpers in the Fort needed rest and food.

SOLDIERS AID IN THE RESCUE.

Col. Owen, R.A., arrived on the mow end at once directed that the soldiers should be called in to assist. The first detachmeot arrived from Golden Hill about eight o'clock, and when they took on most of the men who had been working at the ropes for four hours had either badly blistered or bloodshot eyes, and in some cases  both. Wet through and very fatigued, it was a pity that some shelter could not be found for them. To prevent unauthorised persons gaining admittance to the inside of the Fort the gates had been locked, but before the military arrived it was found necessary to keep the gates secured with another object—to allow no one to pass out of the Fort, that there should be no lack of assistance at the ropes. Dr. Hellis arrived a little later on, and his valuable help was much needed. The Rev. Eric J. S. Rudd came to offer what consolation he could to the injured men, and his offices were gratefully accepted. He was again in attendance on Monday, together with the Rev. P. Haythornthwaite. At a quarter to ten 25 had been rescued, and at half past ten a fresh relay of soldiers arrived from Golden Hill. When the twenty-third (a stowaway) was brought ashore, he reported that there were six more forward and one lad aft, who was afraid to venture along the main stays. It was determined to work on and clear the ship, but it was found impossible to get the boy that night. The last of the remaining six forward was got off at half-past 12. The boy, wrapped in rag and

LASHED TO THE MAST,

was left there for the night. Communication waa kept up with the ship all night. On the Monday morning Coastguard and a coloured mnn belonging to the ship went off and brought the lad safely to land. The brilliant and skilful handling of the rocket apparatus by Mr. Spilmnn and his gallant corps of coastguards cannot be too highly praised. The record of the saving of thirty lives in such fearful weather bears witness to their heroism, skill, and judgment. As for Mr. Spilman, those who saw him can best testify to his untiring energy and cheerful demeanour, and to the confidence which he inspired in every one. Mr. William Rogers and Mr. David St. John are also deserving of notice for the support they gave Mr. Spilman in working the gear. In the other departments of the work Major Playfair, Major Walford, Capt. Symonds, Master Gunner Lloyd, Sergt.-Major Thompson, Bomb. Reeves, and P.C. Helyer all distinguished themselves in rendering what assistance was possible. The Artillerymen generally worked grandly. Artificer-Sergt. Wilmot, who had taken charge of the signal telescope in the early part of the day, keeping Mr. Spilman well informed of the movements on board, acted as cook and steward when the survivors were brought in. Mr. Orchard brought some spirits and Mr. George Trevanion some pillows and bedding, which proved useful.

NARRATIVES OF THE SURVIVORS.

The following particulars of the vessel, voyage, crew, &c., wore supplied different survivors, and are best given in their own words. One man said : Our ship is the Irex, outward bound from Glasgow to Rio de Janeiro, with a cargo of iron pipes used in gas-works, and each weighing about thirty-three hundred weight. She is a steel built ship and new ; this is her first trip out. She is owned by Clink and Co., Greenock, and her registered tonnage is 2248 tons. We have between three and four thousand tons aboard. left Glasgow on the 10th December. The cargo shifted first day out, and we put back to Greenock, had cargo re-stowed, and started again. It was blowing a gale of wind all the time, and we have experienced rough weather ever since. We have been beating about in the Irish Channel, and once we got as far the Bay of Biscay, but had to put back again. In the meantime, while knocking about, two men were disabled, one with broken leg and broken arm, the other with broken leg. When off Falmouth we begged the captain to run in and put the injured men ashore, but he wouldn't, but said would put them on board of any passing ship going in. So we came on. No one knew where we were going and the captain would not say. The mate was asked to run her into port, but replied that he would sink her first. The narrator went on to speak of the time when the vessel struck the shore at 10.30 Saturday night. He saw the captain alongside a boat aft giving orders for the boat to be got out. The captain, the mate, and the boatswain were standing together. One man got in the boat, but soon got out again, and while talking together a big sea swept over the poop and washed them overboard. The seamen regained the ship, and the others were not seen again. Since then, continued the narrator, our troubles have been great. The sea was washing over as, and I went forward and got in the rigging, and remained there all night. At daybreak we made signals to the lighthouse, and waited for help. During this time the ship had been much damaged on deck. There were two berths left in the deck-house. One was used by the old seaman, "Harry”—we none of us knew his other name. He had a broken leg and couldn't get up the rigging. He was an old man, and bad bean injured soma days, and as the deck-house stood pretty firm, we thought he would be safe till the lifeboat came alongside, for we could see the lifeboat then, and we gave the lifeboat credit for being able to save "Old Harry" if nobody else; but she went back, and when we saw the red flag 

OUR HEARTS WENT DOWN

ten degrees. About ten minutes after the lifeboat turned back we saw a tremendous sea wash right through the house, carrying the old man with it. He washed about on deck for little while and then got his finishing stroke through being thrown against the poop. He is now jammed between some pipes in one of the hatches. Another one drowned was boy. He was stupid boy, and seams to have lost his senses. When we told him to come aloft he wanted to go below, and no inducement that we could offer would make him come up. At last he sat under one of the hatches, until it was swept away; and so he went from one hatch to another till five were swept away, and the last we saw of him was about three o'clock Sunday afternoon, trying to swim to the main hatchway, where got jammed and was killed. I was the man who went and got the rocket line. It was

A GRAND SHOT,

and our hearts went up thirty degrees. After the work was finished I was sent ashore first to try the rope, because we wanted the injured men to come easy in their minds. That poor man who came second with a broken arm and leg had been crushed all night between a spar and winch on the poop, and to hear his fearful, agonising cries would have made you pity him. The narrator went on to say that all the clothes, chests, and money, about twenty days' pay, had all been washed overboard, but was very thankful that so many kind friends had come to the rescue. The narrator added that he had been to sea 22 years, and he animadverted strongly on the ship and its management.

Another survivor said, "God be praised we came ashore here," and then described the voyage very similarly to the preceeding one, but the point of interest was the immediate incidents before the vessel struck. He said "We have had bad weather ever since we started on the 10th December, and the captain was like a madman, Poor fellow, he didn't know where he was going and when we asked him he couldn't tell. We beat up to St. Catherine's light, the electric light, and then came on and saw the Needles lighthouse light. I reported land to the captain, and aftar my telling him that he would not weather that light he ordered ne aloft to one of the sails, making the remark, "If we don't weather it we must go somewhere else." Directly I went aloft the captain went aft, and the ship was headed straight for shore, and she came in as you now see her. After she struck I went aft, and when the captain gave orders for the boat to be got out, I helped and got in the boat, but got out again quickly, because there was no plug in the bottom. The sea then

SWEPT THE CAPTAIN, MATE, AND BOATSWAIN OVERBOARD.

I could not aay whether they were in the boat or not, but don't think they were in the boat. When the captain, mate, and boatswain were gone, and I had got back safe, I made for the rigging and was up about five minutes past eleven. When it was daylight, which we had been praying for all night, I could aee where we were; and as the tide went down I went below and got into the captain's cabin, which was up to my waist in water, to see if I could find the ship's papers and log book, but after making a complete search found nothing. So there was no account left of how the captain had been steering for the past two days, but it vary evident he was wrong somewhere, to be wrecked off the Isle of Wight outward bound from Glasgow to Rio. He than gave the following list of names being aboard when the vessel left Glasgow :-Captain Hutton ; mate, James Irvine; boatswain, Ernest Hanson ; second mate, Mr. Reid; boatswain's mate, Charles Campbell; A.B. and O.S., James Andrews, Alex. Thompson, Wm. Colquhoun, Robert Durrick, Stephen Carroll, James Murray, Thomas Weeks, Ned Collins, Harry Moore, John Mellroy, Dick Stearne, Sam Hughes. Isaac Rose, John Niccolls, Harry Duncan, George Brown, J. Derrick, "Old Harry"; apprentices, Laker, Hatchett, Jones, Barham, Bonner, Scaffield, two stowaways, Duffy, Robinson, cook, steward, sailmaker, carpenter, boy Ogilvie—thirty-six all told. The captain, mate, and boatswain, the boy Ogilvie, "Old Harry," and one other were drowned. When asked if they had any rule for the men coming ashore, the narrator replied that they were sent ashore in the same rotation as they came from the mizzen and main. In the course of Sunday morning, he further stated, they had some condensed milk and port wine—all that could be saved. There were plenty of provisions on board, but they could not be got at. Hs added "She was a fine ship, but too much for three masts—she ought to have been a four-master. She was too much for the captain, and the boatswain was frightened of her all the way, and declared he would like to go under his father (who is captain) again." Several of them understood the rocket apparatus, but could not get to work at it until they had more strength. They were obliged to cut one of the ropes because it entangled with the hawser, but once in working order it worked well.

The second man with broken lag was operated upon on Monday morning and is as well as can be expected. The first one is very ill and little hopes are entertained of his recovery. The lad who was left aboard is well.

A MESSAGE TBOM THE QUEEN.

The following telegram from Sir John Cowell, Osborne, was received by Mr. Todd, Totland Bay, at 12.50 on Monday. "Please to telegraph to me for the Queen's information how many parsons have been saved and how many lost in the wreck of the Irex, and where the survivors are now." The desired information was sent to Sir John as soon as it could be obtained, and the news that the Queen was making inquiries about them cheered the shipwrecked men very greatly. All the men who could be moved were conveyed to Yarmouth and put up at Hr. Butler's on Monday night. They left Totland Bay about 7.15.

The names of the six men left behind on Monday are as follows: —second mate, Mr. Reid ; carpenter, James Gilmour; able seamen, Moore, and Richard Sterne; apprentices, Jones and Swaffield.

The Irex has not moved, and she has been visited by the owners' representative. The sea was comparatively calm on Thursday, and the decks of the ship were dry. The body of the seaman "Old Harry" has been removed from the ship.

[From our Freshwater Correspondent.] Freshwater, IW., Monday.

The Irex struck at 1O o'clock Saturday night, and remained there without being discovered, until at nine or thereabouts on Sunday morning she was seen and the alarm was given. The coxswain of the Totland Bay lifeboat signalled the crew and proceeded thither in tow of a tug, but to the surprise of the anxious watchers on the shore the boat did not go near the helpless vessel. The life-saving apparatus was then got into working order and the hawser made fast to the vessel, to secure fixing inside the Needles Battery. The news spread rapidly and brought a large number persons on the scene from Freshwater village, and also from Brooke, Brighstooe, Yarmouth, and other parts of the Island. While the work preparing for the rescue was going on the crew were seen huddled together in various parts of the rigging, and one young fellow was seen to fall to the deck, but he quickly scrambled to the shrouds and got aloft before the next sea broke over her, although apparently much hurt. The first and second men were got on shore by sheer hard work through not enough men being on the rope. It was then found that an appeal was necessary to those who had been only too anxious to render assistance but ware denied admittance to the Fort. The appeal was responded to in true British style, and many remained till late at night pulling the men ashore with characteristic pluck and endurance, and the officers of the R.A. were all there assisting with willing hands and valuable advice.

[From our Yarmouth Correspondent.]

The fine three-masted steel ship Irex, of Greenock, from Glasgow to Rio Janeiro, with a cargo of pipes, stranded at 10 o'clock on Saturday night in Scratchell's Bay, near the Needles. The vessel since leaving had encountered very bad weather and was running for shelter. An attempt was made to launch a boat, and the master and mate lost their lives. The vessel filling fast, the crew took to the rigging, where they had to remain all through Saturday night and the greater part of Sunday. The vessel was first observed at daybreak on Sunday, and the Totland Bay lifeboat put off to the wreck in tow of steamer. All endeavoars, however, to make the Irex proved fruitless, owing to the tremendous sea running, and the boat returned. Subsequently, with the aid of the rocket apparatus, a line was got on board and a hawser paseed to the wreck. The first man was landed on the cliff above the Bay at 4 o'clock on Sunday afternoon, and daring the next hour five more were got to shore. One of these poor fellows had an arm and lag broken some days ago in a heavy gale, and a seaman similarly disabled was washed out of the forecastle and drowned. The ship carried 36 souls, two of them stowaways. The men had taken refuge in all three tops, and those from the main and mizzen masts had to climb along the stays to the foremast, where the hawser from the top of the cliff was attached. One lad in doing this fell to the deck, but regaining his feet climbed the rigging again. Six of the crew were drowned. The cliff on Sunday afternoon was lined with spectators, who could distinctly see the figures of the crew clinging for dear life to the rigging. The wreck lies near the spot where the sad fatality happened to the Corinne's boat last summer.

INQUEST.

On Wednesday morning the Coroner for the Island (E. F. Blake, Esq.) held an inquest tat thebs Albion Hotel, Freshwater, on the body of Jamas H. Irvine, first mate of the Irex, which was washed into Freshwater Bay and recovered Monday evening. The following evidence was adduced:—

Mark Rutter, pensioner from the Royal Artillery, living at Freshwater, deposed discovering the body of deceased in the water near the Esplanade, Freshwater Bay, Monday evening. He immediately gave information to the police. Two bodies had been seen during the afternoon, but it was not possible to secure them then.

Thomas Estella deposed that he belonged to Belfast and had been steward on board the toll-rigged ship Irex since December. On the 10th of December they started from Greenock for Rio Janeiro laden with iron pipes. The crew consisted of 34, and they afterwards ascertained that there were two stowaways on board. When they got off the Isle of Man the cargo shifted, and they returned to Greenock. They started again on the 24th of December and anchored at Belfast Lough the following day, as the wind was against them. They stayed there till the 1st of January. There was a heavy gale on the 5th in the Channel, and six men were injured, two badly. They were 14 days in the Bay of Biscay, and could not get beyond it. The cargo shifted again, and the crew went aft and asked the captain to return, the ship was making water and not fit to proceed. The captain then put hack for Falmouth, off which place he lay to for the night and the vessel rolled badly. The captain steered for Portland. On Saturday, the 25th, the day waa foggy and the captain could not take observations, and we passed Portland. The same evening the captain looked for the Shambles light. He saw a light which he took for that of a pilot. THe captain ordered the ship to be steered for the light. In a minute they struck rock. This would about 11 pm. The captain at once ordered the four boats to be set adrift. The mate was in one boat looking for the plug which fitted in the bottom of the boat, and the captain was the lee side of the boat. A sea then struck her and carried away the boat, mate, and captain. Witness saw the boat afterwards in the water, and the deceased called out, but no one could help him. Saw the boat for two three minutes, going towards the rocks, and then lost sight of it. A second boat was washed away at the same time. All hands went to the rigging and stayed there during the night. One seaman, with a broken leg, named Harry Grayson, was washed out of the forecastle and drowned, and a boy named William Ogilvie was jammed under a spar. Two or three men tried to get him free, but owing to the heavy sea they were obliged leave him and go to the rigging. A heavy sea, however, released him, and he got into the hold, where he was drowned. The boatswain, Ernest Hanson, was drowned in the cabin, and on Sunday an appreentice named Hatchett was washed overboard. The rest of the crew and the two stowaways were afterwards rescued by the apparatus. They were only 200 or 300 yards from the land. The captain was an experienced man and had been on duty ever since he left Belfast Lough the 1st January, never having been to bed. The Needles light is red, and a pilot's light would be bright. Witnes saw the light before the ship struck, and could see it was red. A lifeboat came to their rescue, but returned, thinking they could not reach the ship. Witness was of opinion they could have done so. It waa a poor attempt. The deceased lived close to Dundee.

In reply to questions by the Coroner and foreman of the jury, witness said he attributed the vessel coming on shore to the foggy state of the day and to the captain's mistake as to the position of the vessel and the nature of the light: he did not think she was anywhere near the Ilse of Wight, He was man of great experience but greatly fatigued. He did hhisie best to save life and the ship. Could not account far the captain mistaking the Needles light for a pilot's, but that he really did so was shown by his ordering them to get ready blue lights and a line to get the pilot on baard. Had no idea how the mate came by the marks on his face; probably he struck his chin in going overboard. There was no disagreement between the men and the officers; they were all on friendly terms. Witness was of the opinion that the lifeboat could have taken them off in safety. The crew might not have thought so, because of the surf, but there was a good lee side to the vessel.

Charles Campbell said he lived at Greenock, and was engaged as boatswain's mate an board the Irex. This was her first voyage. On Friday witness was on duty the whole night. There was a heavy sea. They saw the Portland light that night. He went below at 6 p.m. on Saturday, and soon afterwards heard the call, "All hands deck." He went up at once, and the deceased gave him orders to set the outer jib. Was doing when she struck, and then came off the forecastle. Then saw one of the boats washed away and heard some one calling for help, and looked over and a saw man in a boat. Could not see who it was, but knew it was deceased's voice. Witness had sailed with him before, but not with the captain.

In reply to the Coroner, witness said he was of opinion that the captain did all that be could during the gale, and that all the crew performed their duty to the best of their power.

Questioned by Mr. Reason, one of jury, witness said he did not hear of the crew request the captain to heave the ship to for the night. Never heard the captain say he would run her the "white walls." The men were on friendly terms with the captain.

Foreman said there were rumours to the contrary.

The Coroner, in summing up, said the jury had paid great attention to the evidence. As far as he was capable of judging, the two men of the Irex had made their statements in a very satisfactory manner. They appeared to have given all the information in their power. The captain of the Irex seemed to have paid much attention to his duties. The evidence showed that be never went to bed all since the ship left Belfast. No doubt the poor fellow did make a mistake to the light. It seemed this was a pure accident. No one could prevent it, and no blame was attachable to any one. They must not pay attention to any rumours which were circulated on such occasins as these. The uoty of the jury was to be guided by the evidence. He did not think there was any other course to admit than to return a verdict that the deceased's life was lost accidentally.

The Foreman said he had heard there was man on board who hoa been oot past the Needles lots of times, but the Coroner said they could not into that.

In reply to question by one of the jury, P. S. Matthews said there were several other witnesses, but they could not say more than these had.

Mr. Spilman, of the coastguard, said mistake had been made about the rocket apparatus. The first man was brought ashore at three o'clock and not four.

Mr. Reason said they could find different evidence to that which had been heard now. One of the ship's crew told him that they asked the captain to put back. He swore, and said he would not, but that he would run the lot into the "white walls."

The Coroner: It is not likely he would talk to a man in that way.

The jury returned a verdict of "Accidentally drowned."

THE CONDUCT OF THE TOTLAND BAY LIFEBOAT CREW AT THE WRECK OF THE IREX

As recorded in our narrative of the wreck of the Irex, the Totland Bay lifeboat put out and had advantage of being towed by a steam collier, the Hampshire, within about 300 yards of the ill-fated vessel, but to the terrible disappointment of the poor fellows on board the Irex, and to the utter astoundment of the spectators on the cliffs, it stopped short on its errand of mercy, and returned to shore without accomplishing its lifesaving mission. How was this? Island lifeboats —notably those of Brooke and Brighstone—have ere now faced more fearful odds than any which the Totland Bay crew had to encounter on this occasion; but they have gone heroically forward and have accomplished their work of rescue. There is no mistaking the fact that the conduct of the Totland lifeboat man on this Sunday has given rise to considerable amount of indignant feeling in neighbourhood, and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution owe it to themselves and to the noble service which they control, and which the world has to regard one of the glories of England, to institute a searching inquiry into this failure of the lifeboat crew at Totland Bay to go forward to the rescue of thirty poor shipwrecked souls in imminent peril of death within few hundred yards them.

AN INTERVIEW WITH ONE OF THE LIFEBOAT CREW.

A correspondent, who has had an interview with one of the lifeboat crew, writes us as follows : There were, I am informed, 15 men in the lifeboat—12 at the oars, one at the bow, and two coxswains, the first coxswain being Mr. Stone, chief boatman (coastguard) at Totland Bay. The crew was composed of coastguard men and local watermen. The captain of the Hampshire steam collier, who acted nobly, towed the boat outside the lighthouse and to within about 300 yards the wreck, and then let go. The boat was than pulled about 100 yards nearer the wreck, when a heavy sea came, which frightened some of the crew, and the coxswain than gave tha order to pull towards the steamer to be taken in tow again. "We could have gone and taken the poor men off without any danger," said my informant. "It was rough, but only just rough enough to call out the stuff which lifeboat crews are supposed to be made of. A good fishing-boat could have done it." After being taken in tow again by tha collier the rope got hung up round the propeller, and the boat was driven in under the stern, in consequence of which it had to be cast adrift again. "Did you then try to reach the wreck?" I inquired. "No," was the reply; "we got no encouragement from the coxswain. We were waiting about there for about a quarter of an hour looking at it, and then the collier took us in tow again and towed us to Totland. One of crew—a coastguard mam— said "Are we Englishmen to leave those poor fellows clinging to the rigging.'" "When we got back to shore," my informant continued, "ashamed enough some of us were to think that we, lifeboat man as we were, should have come back like that; but we were not all to blame. Some of us wanted to go on and would have faced anything, but the majority were frightened as soon as they saw a little sea. Every one on the cliff was expecting to see us take back the crew, and we could not have saved them and been back by half-past two; but, as I have said, we hadn't a word of encouragement from the coxswain from the time we started till we got back. Mr. seely was there, and through him a number of the Brooke lifeboat crew, who were also present, offered their services, but the offer was not accepted." "Is the boat one of the Institution lifeboats?" I inquired. "She is," was the reply, "and a splendid boat she is, fit to go anywhere. It wasn't the boat's fault, sir. Could she have spoken she would have said 'Go on ! go on! Save them ! save them!'"  "And if an inquiry were held," I asked, "should you have any hesitation in stating that, in your opinion, you could have reached the ship and saved the crew!" "No hesitation at all," was the reply. "You see, sir, in being towed out we had a chance that doesn't often happen. We were quite fresh, and if we had tried we could have done it, but we didn't try. One the poor fellows who was on the wreck afterwards told me that when they saw the lifeboat coming out they set up a cheer as well as they could, and waved blankets, and said 'Here comes the lifeboat! God bless her!' and then when they saw us turn back, he couldn't describe what their feelings were. Let me say again that all honour is due to the captain of that collier. The sea was washing his decks, but ihe stood by, and did all he could, brave heart !" I have learned that amongst the lifeboat men who wanted to go on were young Jacob Cotton, who worthily bears a  name honoured in the Island lifeboat service, "Laddie" Calloway, C. Calloway, W. Sanders, Simmonds, and Frank Hayman. It seems evident that what is wanted at Totland Bay is a thorough re-organiaation of the lifeboat crew, who should be systematically practiced, and placed under management similar to that which works so splendidly at Brooke and Brighstone, whose crews have made for themseleves names of glory in our Island annals. I know what a friend the lifeboat service has in the *Country Press**, and in sending this communication to you my hope is that the publicity given to it may lead to such steps as will prevent the recurrence of such a melancholy spectacle as that which Totland Bay witnessed on the occassion under notice.

As all information bearing on the subject should be made known, we publish the following letter which we have received from another correspondent, who states that he was present on the occation, and that he knows the tidea about Totland Bay from seven years' acquaintance in yachts and boats; 1. The lifeboat could undoubtedly have got into Scratchell's Bay, but even if it had been lucky enough to grapple the ship, it is very doubtfull whether it would ever have rowed out again against such a wind and sea and with the additional weight of 30 men. 2. The tug which appeared off Alum Buy from Cowes could have come out on the ebb about 3 p.m. and rendered valuable assistance by dropping the lifeboat down under the yards of the ship, when the sailors could probably have dropped by ropes into her ; but the tag never ventured out; and this wants explanation. 3. It also wants to be explained how it is that the ship was not discovered before, as her green starboard light was even burning all Sunday. It would not, probably, be visible from the Needles, but it would by a coastguard on the cliff. And it was hours after daylight before he received notice. 4. The ship was about 400 yards from the Fort, which is about 300 ft. high.

THE CAPTAIN AND THE COMPASS OF THE IREX.

To the Editor of the Isle  Wight County Press.

Sir,—As a good deal of blame is bestowed on the captain of the Irex, who, it is said, did not know his whereabouts, &c., may I suggest that allowance should be made far the fact that there was a great deal of steel in the ship which might have affected the compass. Cases have been known in the past. Even a steel umbrella frame has been known to alter the compass as it was brought near it, and has refused to answer aright for the time. I do not it was so here, but there is a probability of it—Yours obediently, T. Scotchmer. Channel View House, Niton, 30th January, 1890.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18900208/093/0005
Isle of Wight County Press and South of England Reporter
Saturday 08 February 1890
p5

THE LIFEBOAT CREW AT THE WRECK OF THE IREX

Its Editor of It* /sir Wight Owaty/Wsa Sir,—the action of the Tolland Bay lifeboat the wreck of the Irez has been very freely eoasmrnted and sometimes adversely by those who viewed the incident from the topof aoU WO feat high and immediately above the ship. I would only say that from that position the bulwark of the ship appears to rim only U inches above the deck, when ee feet it rises feet, more than four lie apparent height. Would not the wavne be equally foreshortened from the position?—Yours obediently, Iraz, SomteheUe Bny. F. Daulu

To the Editor of the Isle of Wight County Press. Sir,—With reference to the eooonnt given in year paper of February Ist, I instructed by the committee of the local breach the Royal National Lifeboat Inetitotion inforsn yon that prior to the date last Batordsy's issue they had placed themsalves in oommanicntsoa with tbs parent institution with regard to the satire cirenmstsnoss of the lifeboat service to the skip Irez, end that private inquiry was formally halo an the Sth inat. by duly qnalified official. —I am-Sir, year* obediently, Watsbhoukx, Hon. See. Tolland Bey. 6th, 1880.

RECOGNITION FOR THE RESCUE OF THE IREX CREW.

To Editor of the Isle of Wight County Press, Sir, —Mr. i. D. Clink, the owner of the ship Iraz, has asked Iktorah year ooiomns to Under hie thanks to those who helped to rescue the craw of bis vessel and to the many who have sinee shown much kindness to three unfortunate men. To Mr. Hpihnan, who so ably directed the working the racket apparatus; to tbs oOcan ami men of the fans; and to the Bar. J. Bailey, of Cowee, his thanks era especially due. Tour oorrespnndsnt has aheady pointed out bow admirably the craw wan rasenad in the face of alipoet overwhelming difkaluea, and I cannot help thinking that sceae public recognition should be made to thorn who effected the leeeae. Mr. Clink has forwarded ate IBS for this purpose, and if say of your readers think fit to saau any contribution I will see that it is properly applied.—l am. Sir, your obedient servant, H. C. Damant, Lloyd's Agent for Us of Wight. Oowea, 1.W., Feb. 6,18U0. 

THE RELIEF FUND FOR THE WOUNDED "IREX" MEN.

To the Editor of the Isle of Wight County Press, Sir,—My in your oolomn* of bnt week, in ■id the wounded men anved from the wreck the Irez, hue been than nenenmely reeponded to. The total amount of the eubecription at pement amounte to £U* 9a. 6d., I expect more will come in. The two injured men, Sterna and Oilman, are •till lying at the Needle* Fort, eerioualy ill They are well looked alter by Un. Hollis and Dean and Him Martindale, on bearing of their injuries, onee went oat to none them. We have been enabled to bring Sterne's wife down from Greenock to help, to their mutual great happiness. I should like to take this opportunity of calling attention to (as I have not seen it mentioned) the good feeling of the crew of the Ires towards one another. The Rev. J. Bailey writes me, that on being presented with the handsome subscription at Cowes, they expressed wish that their unfortunate mates left behind should be presented with some of it. They also showed the most complete unselfish, nsec and calmness in being landed from the wreck, which is all the more to their credit, they had no officers to command them, sny one to take the lead. Haring first triad the stability of the rope, they then scat off the wounded and the weakest cases, after which each man followed in his proper tun, they had arrived on the foremast, without any excitement or bony. Every one of them whom I spoke on the subject wss agreed this point It is great pleasure to be able to boar testimony to this, in face of the unfounded rumours that are going about in connection with the discipline of the ship. Will you kindly allow to acknowledge the following farther contributions, received since last week, and express the most heartfelt thanks of the two poor men the Needles the kind people who have enabled them to obtain fresh start in life.—l remain, yours faithfully, G7j. Platvais. Major Royal Artillery. Alton House, Freshwater, 6th February, 1890. Subscriptions. Master Gunner Green. E.A., sa; Mr. H. Todd, 55.; Rev. F. Drake, £2; Mrs. Nicholson, £1; Mrs. Renwick, £1; CoL Lyons, 10s.; The Hem. Mrs. Oroavcnor Hood, £2; Mias Tucker, £1; Mr. W. Senior, £1; Mr. J. B. Osriiok, 6*.; Dr. and Mrs. Hollis. £1 Is.; Mrs. Moulton Barrett. Ss.; Mr. P. Jones, £1 Is.; Miss E. Ward, £1 Is.; Mr. and Mrs. Granville Ward, £5 Ss.; Mr. Hickman. £1; Lady Playfair, £1: Mrs. Steward, £1; CoL H. G. Browne. V.C., and Mrs. Browne, £2 2s. ; Miss Cotton (Norton), £2; the Misses Oldsrshaw. ; Mr. Henry Mortimer, £1; Mr. T. E. Bidgood, £1; Mr. F. Green, Ss.: Sir Henry Daly, 0iC.8., (Totlaad Bay), £1; Mr. dw. Ffamley, £1; Mrs, Neale. £1; the Rev. J. N. Palmar. £1; the Rev. Eric Rudd, £1; the Rev. John Bailsy (Cram Cowes subscription), £5; Messrs. Mew, Langton, and Co., £S 35.; Mr. sod Miss Ross, £1 la.; lady Simeon, £1; the Rev. P. Haythornthwaits, Sa.; Mr. T. Watson, 10s. 6d.; two friends, ; Mias Wallace, 55.; Miss Hogarth, Sn ; the Rev. the Hon. & Bligfa. £2 2a ; Mis. Bouch, £1) M.J.A., Ss.; Mrs. N. M. Estcourt, £2 2s. : the Lady Imbsl Bligfa, £1; Mr. Wateriranaa, Ss.; Mr. Dowsing, Ss.; Commsndsr and Mrs. Burt, £l. 

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18900201/094/0008

Isle of Wight County Press and South of England Reporter
Saturday 01 February 1890

p8

THE WRECK OF THE IREX.

In onr sixth page will be found (nil details of the fatal wrack near the Needles last Saturday night, together with report the inquest on the body of the first mate, and communication relating to the conduct of the Totland lifeboat craw, the writer narrating an Interview which has had with cos the craw. Farther details from oor correspondents Totland Bay, Freshwater, and Yarmouth show what wealth of kindness has bean bestowed on the sufferers both the military and the civil Halation. Mr. Saely was present on SnndaT, ping with the rescue work, and the first supply food which arrived early in tbs evening wee emit for him. A letter from Major Pliyfair in onr prsaant issue states that relief food has bean started, and wa sure that his appeal will mast with generous response. As will be seen paragraphs which follow, the Queen boa abown the interest in the survivors and the noble work of rescue performed by those in charge of the rocket •pp^ratat. One of the apprentices on board the ill-fated ship was the son of clergyman, and since the wrack be has been staying at the rectory. He ha* now been home by his father, who came for him. The funeral the mate of the Irex, J. H. Irvine, took place the old parish church, Freshwater, yesterday. In connection with the splendid work done the rocket apparatus at Totland Bay on the occasion af the wrack the Irex, may interest to axsitioa that Ufa-saving invention of great value, (or use not only at but also at fires shore, has this weak been subjected to exhaustive trials. is pneumatic Kne-throwing ran, very light and portable, which discharges a hollow shell to which cord is attached, and it should prove vary servioeable. It the invention of Commander John D'Any-Irvine, E.N. the wreck viewed by princess BEATRICE. H.R.H. PHuceas Bwtrio* Tinted Totland Bey yesterday, and Hewed the wreck.

THE QUEEN AND THE RESCUERS.

Our Totland Bay onreapondent telegraphed evening that the non-oommiaaioned offioera who aaaiataß in the work of reacne last Sunday hare reoatTsd the commands of Her Majesty to appear before the Queen at Osborns at two o'clock this (Saturday) afternoon. THE SURVIVORS RECEIVED BY THE QUEER. On Thundnr nftanooß the Re». J. B*iley, M.A.f vicar of Holy Trinity, Cowea, took the crew of the Irex Oebocne, command of Her Majeaty. The men were received by the Queen the main entrance. The Rev. J. Bailey waa preaented to the Queen Sir Henry Pooaooby, and HerMajeaty made aeveral iuqniriaa of him about the crew. The Queen alao a poke petaonally to the men in tonne deep aympathy. and they ware greatly moved by Her Majeaty'a gracion* kindneoa. The Queen gave £lO to the fund raiaed Holy Trinity to clothe the men, and the clothing waa diatributed to the crew on Friday motniiw at the Dolphin Coffee Tavern, The fund amounted to £25.

THE WRECK OF THE IREX.-FUND FOR THE RELIEF OF THE WOUNDED SEAMEN. To the Editor of the /afro/ Wight Frew. Sir,—No doubt all your read era, who have sot already heard of the wreck of the Irex at the Naedlre, will read the full account in your edition of tint week. Two of the crew ship are now lying the Needle* Fort, aeriooaly ill, one of them with hia leg badly broken, the other one hat bad to have one leg amputated, and in addition baa the other one almoat aa bad, an ana broken, well aa other injuries. A fund ia being raiaed, ao that when theee men are recovered, they may find meana to atart in tome boaineas. I dare aay many your readers win gladly subscribe towards this, and if ao I should be moat happy to receive their enbacriptiona. The man who has got the wont injury baa suffered untold agonies, having bean lying for many boon, through the storm. With, heavy weight upon him, which killed another man. and which his comrades were unable to remove. ia married, and was looking forward to setting up a house with his wife, on hrs return from this .disastrous voyage. is brave man, and suffers without a murmur, but what is preying on his mind ia that he has lost the means of supporting his wife. 1 sure many would have subscribed towards this fund, and felt their hearts gladdened, had they seen hia (ace brighten when told that a subscription waa being got up to give him fresh atart in life. list of money received, up till the present, and other* have promised to help.—l remain, yours faithfully, G. J. Playfair, Major Royal Artillery. Alton Hooee, Freshwater, 30th January, 1800. Lord Tennyaon, £5; Chariea SmJt, Ekj., £5; Mrs, Serly, £5; Min Seely. £1; Mr. and Mrs. Evans, £2; Major Playfair, £S; Mia. Playfair, £1; F. K. PickeragilL Esq., £3: a friend, Sa.; Captain and Mrs, Stratford, £2; Mr. Hickman, £1: Mrs. Hodges, 10s.: Maty Lady Hamond Gneroe, £1; the Hon. S. Hewitt, £1; the Hon. E. Hewitt, 10s.; the Hon. J. Tracy, 10s.; Mrs. Pixley, 55,; CoL Owen and officers R.A.. £10; CoL Crosier, £5; Mr. Aitken, £1; Mr. ConiwU, £1; Mr. Palmer, £1; Mr. Tankard, £1; Mr. Dover, £1; Mr. Fox, £1; Rev. R. Blathwayt, Sa.; Rev. R. Brandon, 5a.; Mia, Hayman, 55.; Mia. Allen, 10a. 


---