# The Loss of the Eurydice


---


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000290/18780325/007/0002#

Portsmouth Evening News

Monday 25 March 1878

p2

FOUNDERING OF H.M.S. EURYDICE OFF THE ISLE OF WIGHT.

FEARFUL LOSS OF LIFE.

PAINFUL EXCITEMENT THE TOWN AND DOCKYARD.

Since the memorable day in September, 187O, when H.M.S. Captain foundered off Cape Finisterre and when nearly all hands were drowned, no naval disaster has occurred of a nature so truly awful as that which it is our most painful duty to announce as having happened yesterday afternoon to H.M. training ship Eurydice, just as that ill-starred vessel was almost within sight of the harbour, where all on board were anxiously expecting the meeting of those the enforced separation from whom had been the chief cause of regret during the continuance of the voyage apparently so rapidly drawing to successful conclusion. The Eurydice was a training ship for youths of the rating of ordinary seamen, and every year it was the practice of the authorities to send her on deep sea cruise, for tha purpose of giving the young men forming her crew more thorough insight into their duties than any they could receive whilst quietly lying anchor in a land-locked harbour. Tho voyage from which she was returning had been made to the West Indies, and in addition to her crew, we have been informed that she had on board several time-expired men and invalids. We have telegraphed to London for a complete list, and trust to receive it in time for our third edition. So far as we have peon able to gather, she had favouring winds until she sighted the Lizard, and during her subsequent passage up the Channel until she arrived off the Isle of Wight on an afternoon so clear and pleasant as to resembla almost a summer day. However, about four o'clock the sun became obscured and the sky of a dull leaden colours, and a species of mist seemed to envelope the horizon. At the same it time began to snow, and the snow was accompanied with a biting wind of such strength (we had almost said ferosity) that people who a few minute* before had been walking and chatting gaily on the Southsea Common, were bent double by its force, whilst on the Portsdown Hill the dust was lifted and whirled towards the sky in masses resembling water-spouts. Into this storm of haze, and wind and snow, sailed the Eurydice, with every sail set, save and except her mizen-royal, and braced sharp on the port tack. She was seen no more !! A schooner, named the Emma, bound from Newcastle-on-Tyne to Poole, was also caught in the squall, but she weathered it successfully, and almost immediately the sun, we are told, came out again. The master of the schooner, on looking round, states that he saw wreckage, and thought that he heard cries, but there was no sign of the noble ship, which but a moment before had pursued her way proudly with all her studding sails set. Five men were rescued by those on board the Emma, and they were stripped, wrapped in blankets, rubbed, and received every possible attention ; but we much regret to say that three of them died on board, the other two, an A.B. named Benjamin Cuddiford, and a first-class boy, named Sydney Fletcher, of Bristol, were removed to the Cottage Hospital Bonchurch, where they received every attention, and are considered by Dr. Williamson, of Veutnor, to be progressing favourably. The following is the account given Benjamin Cuddiford:

"The ship capsized in a squall and snowstorm about four o clock, when we were five miles from Dunnose.

"There were over 300 men on board, all of whom, except myself, and Fletcher, are, I believe, lost.

"I was one of the last on board the ship. Captain Hare was near me when she went down after capsizing, and she carried with her a large number of men who were clinging to her, who were drawn down in the vortex.

"A man near me said that a vessel was close by when the squall came on, and therefore we should be sure to be picked up. I was more than hour the water, being a first-rate swimmer, and very many of my comrades cried out for help. I tried to assist two or three, but at last there were four clinging me, and I was obliged to kick them off. We were well taken care of by the master the schooner and crew. Our ship left Bermuda three week's ago passed the Lizard yesterday, and expected to anchor at about five o'clock."


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000290/18780325/008/0002?browse=true

Portsmouth Evening News

Monday 25 March 1878

p2

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY TO ADMIRAL FANSHAWE.

(Admiral Fanshawe has authorised us to publish (he following telegram. 

The Queen is deeply grieved to hear of the loss the Eurydice. Her Majesty anxiously asks for further details.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000290/18780325/008/0002?browse=true

Portsmouth Evening News

Monday 25 March 1878

p2-3

SCENE AT THE DOCKYARD GATES.

The scene at the dockyard gates this morning was harrowing in the extreme. The gates this time of the year are opened at seven o'clock, but long before that hour crowds of anxious relatives had assembled in the faint hope that the awful news which had spread through the town during the night might prove after all to be, if not unfounded, at any rate exaggerated ; but tnere was no such comfort for the poor bereaved ones. The officials at the entrance broke the news to them as gently they could, but the scene was one that would have made an impression even on the callous-hearted. Mothers waiting for their sons, bonnie boys just bursting into manhood, and wives who had reason to believe that their husbands were among the time-expired men several of whom it was known had taken passage home by the Eurydice, mourning, only those who are suddenly widowed, can.

RETURN GOVERNMENT TUG "MANLY" TO THE DOCKYARD.

So soon was the accident was reported to the Admiral steamers were sent to the locality; but up to four o'clock, when the tug Manly returned, no bodies had been recovered. A party of riggers who went out in the tug have commenced work, but the divers have not yet gone down.

[Press Association Telegram.]

Our Ventnor correspondent telegraphs that the weather was beautifully fine yesterday afternoon, and every rope of the Eurydice could be distinguished about a mile off. With alarming suddenness a gale set in from the north-west, and surprise was expressed by old salts that the Eurydice did not shorten sail, she having even her standing-sails set. The thick weather concealed her when passing Dunnose Head, and when the weather cleared she was not to be seen. The schooner Emma, of Newcastle, was observed to be lowering boats, only five, however, were rescued. Medical aid was obtained from shore, but three of them were so exhausted that they died shortly afterwards. Two— Cuddiford and Fletcher,— were removed to the College Hospital and soon recovered. Fletcher states that he was below with the greater part of the crew, when, hearing a noise, he rushed up the hatchway aud heard the cry, "All hands for themselves." He caught life buoy, and jumped overboard, as did the others who were picked up. A minute afterwards the ship gave a lurch forward and sank drawing him down a considerable distance, but the life buoy raised him again. The vessel now lies two miles off Luccombe chine. Several gunboats are cruising round the spot, and attempts will be made to raise her. There is some hope that the barque seen near the spot may saved others.

NAMES OF THE PASSENGERS.

We have received a telegram from the Admiralty informing us that the names of the passengers are not known, but that we shall be informed of their ratings, and these, together with later particulars, we hope publish in our subsequent editions.

The following account was received by one of our reporters from an official connected with one of the tugs, which returned from the wreck in the early morning :—

Her Majesty's training-ship Eurydice, commanded by Captain Marcus Hare, capsized about half-past four yesterday afternoon off Dunnose, Isle of Wight. She left Bermuda on the afternoon of the 6th inst. with between three hundred and three hundred and sixty men on board, and was expected here in few days. At four o'clock yesterday afternoon, she was seen by the schooner Emma standing the eastward under all plain sail and courses. She was then braced sharp up on the port tack. A snow storm with heavy squalls then came on, and she lost sight her. At a quarter to five, on the weather clearing a little, the Eurydice was nowhere to be seen. A punt, with five men in it, was perceived, and the schooner immediately bore down upon them and took them on board. Three of them, including the First Lieutenant (Francis H. Tabor), have since died. The other two, named Benjamin Cuddiford, of Plymouth, and Sydney Fletcher, of Bristol, have recovered, and are now being well taken care of the Cottage Hospital, Bonchurch. Cuddiford states that the ship was caught in a squall and capsized about five miles off Dunnose about four o'clock. He was standing close to Captain Hare when the ship went down, sucking many with it. He was about an hour in the water, and tried to save others who clung to him but in order to save himself he was at last obliged to kick them off. The sad news was immediately telegraphed to Admiral Fanshawe, commander-in-chief, who at once sent steamers to search the vicinity, but they found no trace of any other survivors, and it is feared that all hands, with the exception of Cuddiford and Fletcher, are lost. The ship is lying in about twelve fathoms of water, and at low tide her lower yards are above water. The foretop-gallant mast, and the main royal mast are both gone. The mizen royal is the only sail furled. A party of fifty riggers and several divers proceeded to the spot this morning. The Dromedary is to lay by the wreck ait light ship.

In reference to this sad catastrophe the following was received at the Admiralty last night:–

"J. G. Livesey, Ventnor, the Right Hon. W. H. Smith, M.P., Admiralty, London"

"Her Majesty's training-ship Eurydice capsized in a sudden squall, off Dunnose, at half-past four this afternoon, and went down at once.

"The Emma (schooner), passing, picked up five men, but some have since died.

"Cuddicome (?) first-class boy, and Fletcher saved. Tabor, First Lieutenant, very doubtful. Military Engineer officer drowned.

"Ship was commissioned at Portsmouth Feb. 7, 1877, and ordered to the West Indies. Was now bound for Spithead. Was observed passing Ventnor a few minutes before the catastrophe with all sails set. Snowstorm then came on very suddenly, with ery heavy gusts of wind. Probably no more saved than schooner picked up, as a strong ebb tide was running.

"Sun came out brilliantly directly after squall, but nothing could be seen from shore at Ventnor but few large boxes brought down Channel. Certainly no boat.

"Schooner detained by Capt. Roche, R.N., Inspecting Commander St. Catherine Division Coast Guard, who went on board immediately with Ventnor doctor, and has telegraphed to Admiral at Portsmouth to send steamer round,

"Admiral Fanshawe to Admiralty.

"Have just received the following from Coast Guard, Ventnor : 'Eurydice capsized off Dunnose. Cuddicombe, first-class boy, and Fletcher saved; Tabor, first lieutenant, very doubtful, military engineer officer drowned.' "

"Commander Coast Guard, Ventnor, to Admiralty,

"We have two men alive— Cuddiford, A.8., and Fletcher, first-class boy— and the dead bodies of Lieuteuant Tabor, Colonel Ferrier, R.E., and one able seaman."

The Eurydice was a wooden training ship for ordinary seamen and boys, a vessel of 921 tons. She is thus described in the Navy List :

Eurydice, guns, sixth rate.  
Captain—Marcus A. S. Hare, Feb. 7, 1877.  
Lieutenants—Francis H. Tabor, Feb. 7, 1877; Charles V, Strange, Oct. 10, 1877 ; Wm. E. Black, Feb. 7, 1877 ; Stanley A. B..Burney, Feb. 7, 1877.  Staff-Surgeon—James L. Whitney, Feb. 2, 1877.  
Paymaster—Frank Pittman, Feb. 1877.  
Sub-Lieutenants- Hon. Edward R. Gifford, Feb. 7, 1877 ; Herbert S. Edmunds, Feb. 7, 1877 Walter, S. Smith, Mar. 1, 1877 ; Sydney G. Randolph Oct. 26, 1877.  
Surgeon—Robert Murdock, M.8., Feb 1877.  
Gunner—Frederick Allen, Feb. 20, 1877.  
Boatswains—William Brewer, Feb. 9, 1877 ; Joseph Warren, Feb. 20. 1877.  
Assistant Clerk—William Lamont, Feb. 20, 1877.  
Commissioned at Portsmouth, Feb. 7, 1877.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000290/18780325/014/0003

Portsmouth Evening News

Monday 25 March 1878

p3

THE LOSS OF H.M.S. "EURYDICE."

Mr. Goschen asked if the First Lord the Admiralty had any further information in reference to the sad disaster—the loss of the Eurydice– which had spread through the country such deep and universal sorrow. (Hear, hear.)

Mr. Smith was sorry he had not much information beyond what had already appeared in the Press. The disaster was a most mournful one, for the ship was returning after a successful and useful cruise, and the squall by which she was overtaken was so sudden and violent that she went down without notice. Admiral Fanshawe, in a late telegram, reported that everything bad drifted towards the French coast, and no bodies had been recovered. It appeared that when the disaster occurred the men were in the act of shortening sail. The two men recovered were in Bonchurch Cottage Hospital, and it was hoped they would be well enough to be in London, to-morrow. The officers on board the Eurydice were specially selected for efficiency. He expressed the deep sorrow the Admiralty felt at the disaster— the greatest since the loss of the Captain. (Hear, hear.)  
[Left sitting.]


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000290/18780325/009/0003

Portsmouth Evening News
Monday 25 March 1878

p3

THIRD EDITION. MESSAGES FROM THE QUEEN.

The following telegram from Her Majesty the Queen has been received by the First Lord of the Admiralty :

"Windsor Castle, Monday.

The Queen would ask Mr. Smith to make known her grief for the terrible calamity of the Eurydice, and her heartfelt sympathy with the afflicted parents and relatives.

The following telegram, in addition to that already reported by us, has been received by Admiral Fanshawe.

Windsor Castle, Monday.  
"The Queen commands me to thank you for your telegrams, which have caused her the greatest grief."

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001702/18780325/064/0006
Shipping and Mercantile Gazette
Monday 25 March 1878
p6

FOUNDERING OF H.M.& EURYDICE.

We have received the following sad news from the Admiralty:– "The Admiralty have received the following telegram from Admiral Fanshawe, Commander-In-Chief Portsmouth: — 'Have just received the following from Coastguard, Ventnor:— 'Eurydice capsized off Dunnose. Cuddicome, First-class Boy, and Fletcher saved. Tabor, First Lieutenant, very doubtful. Steamer going Immediately'

"A further telegram states that she capsized in a sudden squall at half-past 4 this (Sunday) afternoon. A subsequent telegram states that Lieutenant Tabor and Colonel Ferrler, Royal Engineers, are dead. The Eurydice was commissioned by Captain Hare, in February, 1877, as a training-ship for second-class Ordinary Seamen, and she was returning to Spithead after a winter’s cruise in the West Indies. The Admiral Commanding-in-Chief at Portsmouth has sent steamers to search the vicinity of the accident, but no further report has been received.  
Admiralty, Sunday, 11 30 p.m.”

VENTNOR, Sunday Evening.  
Her Majesty’s training-ship Eurydice capsized in a sudden squall off Dunnose, Isle of Wight, at half-post 4 o’clock this afternoon, and went down at once. The schooner Emma, which was passing, picked up five men. but some of these have since died. Cuddicombe, a First-class Boy, and Fletcher were saved, and Tabor, the First Lieutenant, but it is very doubtful whether he will recover. The military Engineer officer was drowned. The ship was commissioned at Portsmouth on the of February, 1877, and was ordered to the West Indies. She was now bound for Spithead, and was observed passing Ventnor few minutes before the catastrophe with all sail set. A snowstorm then came on very suddenly with very heavy gusts of wind. Probably no more men have been saved than those picked up by the schooner, as a strong ebb tide was running. The sun came out brilliantly directly after the squall, but nothing could be seen from the shore Ventnor except a few large boxes being swept down the Channel, and certainly no boats. The schooner has been detained by Captain Roche, R.N., Inspecting Commander, St. Catherine's Division of the Coastguard, who went on board immediately with Ventnor doctors, and has telegraphed to the Admiral at Portsmouth to send round a steamer.

Later.  
Lieutenant Tabor is dead, and his body has been brought ashore, so that the only survivors, so far as known, are Benjamin Cuddicombe, of Plymouth, and Sydney Fletcher, of Bristol, First-class Boy, aged 19. Cuddicombe states that the ship capsized in a squall and snowstorm five miles of Dunnose, about 4 o’clock. More than 300 men were on board, all of whom, he believes, are lost except himself and Fletcher. Cuddicombe was among the last on the ship. Captain Hare was near him when the ship went down, suclkng many with it. Cuddicombe and man near him said that vessel was close by when the squall came on, and, therefore, they would be sure to picked up. He was over an hour the water. Being a first-rate swimmer, every one called out to him for help. He tried to assist two or three, but last four clung to him, and he was obliged to kick them off. Was well taken care of the Master of the schooner and Crew. The ship left Bermuda three weeks ago, passed the Lizard yesterday, and expected to anchor at Spithead about 5 o’clock.

These two men are well provided for at the Cottage Hospital, Bonchurch, and are under the care of Dr. Williamson, of Ventnor, who considers them to be doing fairly well.

The Eurydice was a training-ship for Ordinary Seamen, and is officially described as sixth rate. She was under the command of Captain Marcus Hare. Having left Bermuda on her return trip as recently as the 6th inst., she was not expected to reach Portsmouth for some days. Her consorts, the Martin and the Liberty, have arrived—the former at Portsmouth, and the latter at Plymouth.

The following list of Officers board is given in the *Navy List* .—Captain Marcus A. S. Hare. Lieutenants : Francis H. Tabor, Charles Y. Strange, William E. Black, Stanley A. Burney. Staff-Surgeon; James L. Whitney. Paymaster: Frank Pittman. Sub-Lieutenants: the Hon. Edward B. Gifford, Herbert S. Edmonds, Walter S. Smith, Sidney G. Randolph. Surgeon : Robert Murdoch, M.B., Gunner: Frederick Allen. Boatswains: William Brewer, Joseph Warren. Assistant Clerk: William Lamont.

[By telegraph.]  
WEST COWES, March 25, a.m.  
Three bodies have come ashore; two identified as those of Colonel Ferrol, RE. (? Ferrier), and Lieutenant Tabor, RN.; the third is an A.B. The masts of the vessel show above water.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000174/18780326/019/0006#
Morning Post
Tuesday 26 March 1878

p6

THE GALE AND SNOW STORM

During the gale which passed over the metropolis so suddenly on Sunday afternoon, several boats were swamped in the upper part of the Thames and loss of life resulted.

The weather in South Shropshire is intensely cold, and tbe hilly district has been visited with fitful storms of snow. Thee tops of the lofty eminences of the Loag-mynd, the Carodoc Range, and the Clee Hills, are all capped with snow.

During a snowstorm which raged off the Scotch cosst at Stranraer on Sunday the schooner Ellipse, with coals, from Greenock for Isly, was totally lost about ten miles from Stranraer. Two of the crew, by name M'Millan and M'Neill, were drowned.

On Sunday afternoon, while the wind was blowng hard from the north, a schooner, which afterwards proved to be the Heroine, of Dartmouth, bound from Lydney to Fremington with a cargo of coals, was seen running for the harbour at Appledore, in Devon, when sha was caught by some dense snow squalls which completely enveloped her. On their clearing away she was found to have been driven on the South Tail Bank, where she was surrounded by broken water. The Appledore No. 1 life-boat of the National Life-boat Institution was launched with all despatch, and was fortunately enabled to save the crew of the vessel, which is likely to become a total wreck.

The screw-steamer Eagle, of Neath, while making for Hayle Harbour, in Cornwall, on Sunday, during a stroug N.E. wind, grounded on the bar, and the heavy seas breaking over her carried away her screw, rudder, and stern poet. The Oxford University life-boat Isis, belonging to the National Life-boat Institution, and stationed at this place, promptly proceeded to her and remained by her for an hour, until it was considered the lives of the crew were no longer in danger.

On Sunday morning, during a strong wind from the north, a vessel ran ashore on the Goodwin Sands. Tha Broadstairs life-boat of the National Life-boat Institution and tbe Ramsgate Harbour steamer Vulcan and life-boat Bradford proceeded to her assistance, and after some hours' exertion they were successful in getting the disabled vessel off the sands and into harbour. She was the brigantine Florida, of Christiania, bound from Frederikstadt to Granville, with a cargo of coal, and had on board a crew of seven men.

On Sunday evening, during a heavy gale from the north, accompanied by snow showers, the schooner Velocity, of Nefyn, bound there from Silloth, exhibited signals of distress in Porthdinllaen Bay, North Wales, and in response thereto the National life-boat George Moore was launched, and succeeded in rescuing ths crew, whom she landed in safety. This life-boat was placed there about six months since, its expense being defrayed from a fund raised amongst the *employés* of Messrs. Copt stake, Hughes, Crampton, aud Co. (lat. Mtssrs. Copestake, Moore, and Co.), to provide a life-boat to be called the George Moore in memory of their late respected employer, the well-known philanthropist.

---



https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000174/18780326/019/0005

Morning Post
Tuesday 26 March 1878

p5

THE LOSS OF THE EURYDICE.

From Our Own Correspondent, Ventnor, Monday

Finding that the two poor fellows who had such a narrow escape from the sinking of the ill-fated Government training-ship Eurydice were sufficiently convalescent to admit of an interview, I spent a short time with them in their bed-room this morning, and elicited a few facts from them concerning tha terrible catastrophe. These poor fellows, Benjamin Cuddiford and Sidney Fletcher, did not appear to be very communicative, but thay exhibited no particular studied desire to withhold any facts. Cuddiford, a powerful-looking man, about 35, was second captain on the quarterdeck, and belongs to Plymouth. Fletcher is a youth about 20 years of age, and was qualifying as seaman. From Cuddiford's statement, which was confirmed by Fletcher, it appears that the Eurydice left Bermuda on the 6th instant, having on board ber full complement o officers and men, with about 300 men and boys in training for her Majesty's navy. There were also Colonel Ferrier aud five other officers of the Royal Engineers on board, with Colonel Ferrier's servant. They had a fine voyage homeward, with the exception of one day's rough sea. As they passed Bonchurch and Ventnor shortly after mid-day the vessel was in full sail, and there appeared not the slightest premonitory indication of the awful event. Part of the men and boys were below deck at the time, and some of them were asleep in their berths, having gone off duty at noon. At the moment of the catastrophe they were thrown bodily from their sleeping postures, and as they rushed to the gangways they were met by the sea and carried below with the ill-fated vessel. There were others firmly locked in the cells below deck, and several were in irons for various misdemeanours. There were six of these prisoners on board, being transferred to Portsmouth — four from her Majesty's ship Rover, which was in the company of the Eurydice on the West Indian station, one from the brig Martin, and one from the Bermuda dockyard. After passing Bonchurch the ship was sailing apparently in safety, when a sudden squall from the W.N.W. caught hold of her canvas, and, with the aid of an immense sea which broke upon the port side of the hull, she was quickly thrown on her beam ends. The captain was at his post, and instantly gave orders to take in the lower studding-sail, which Cuddiford, who was on deck at the time, seized hold of and let go, hastening afterwards to the side of the captain at the stern of the vessel. Other men had been ordered aloft, and were in the act of taking in the royals when the ship sank, carrying all hands with her. There were only four guns on board, bnt they were all fast, and did not seem to move from tbe port holes. She was what the seamen call a "stiff"' vessel, and the hands considered her safe, particularly in regard to the unlooked-for casualty of capsizing. When she heeled over a rush was made for the starboard boat, but they were unable to clear her from her davits and she was stove in ; but as to the boat to windward, that was lifted so high in the air aa to be out of all reach, and it was useless to attempt to utilise it. It had been a beautiful day, and the port doors had been unsuspectingly left open, and when the vessel heeled over the sea rushed into these open ports like a torrent, and the hands on deck plunged into the sea as the craft went down. The captain bravely remained on the deck till nearly every man who was on the upper deck had jumped overboard, and so far as the survivors could remember he went down with the ship. Suddenly thrown into the raging sea, the seamen struggled and cried for assistance, but there was none to help. Tha two men who were saved are good swimmers, aad they say they were in the water about an hour. They could see the cliffs as the snowstorm cleared away, and they struggled hard to reach the shore, but all their efforts proved ineffectual. They were on the verge of despair, when, to make bad worse, they saw to their horror an immense sea rushing towards them and threatening speedy destruction. In their last hope they turned upon the coming wave and in terror awaited their fate. As if by a miracle they found themselves again on the surface of the water. After this swell had spent itself, and again looking round, they discovered a short distance away a schooner which had weathered the terrible storm. By this time they were almost exhausted, but they took fresh courage from the sight of the schooner, which was bound for Poole, and raised their hands as a signal of distress. When hauled on board they became unconscious, but recovered before they were landed at Ventnor.

From other sources it seems that the schooner made signals to the shore, while on board they were doing all they could to restore the poor sea-men, having also picked up Colonel Ferrier, Lieutenant Tabor, and an able seaman who has not get been identified, but is supposed to be named Bennett. All were alive when picked up by the schooner— the Emma, of Poole— but the two officers and the unknown seaman had expired before they reached the shore at Ventnor, whither they were taken by a Deal lugger, which had been chartered by the coaatguards and taken off to the Emma by Chief-officer Clark, of the Ventnor station. Lieutenant Tabor was found clinging to a locker which had been washed from the foundered ship.

Cuddiford and Fletcher left Ventnor by the 2.10 train this afternoon for Portsmouth, there to undergo an examination by the Admiral of the Port. The Eurydice is now lying, it is thought, on a ledge, drifted there by the rough sea. She stands with a slight list, but at low water several feet of her upper masts are observable with the topsails furled. During the day two Government tugs have been at the scene of the wreck.

FROM ANOTHER CORRESPONDENT. PORTSMOUTH. MONDAY.

There is as yet very little to add to the sad account of the loss of life in the Eurydice. The two sailors, Cuddiford and Fletcher, who are as yet known to be the only survivors, have been brought to the dockyard and have been seen by the Commander-in-Chief, Admiral Fanshawe, and other officials. Two sets of divers were sent out this morning to the wreck, but up to 7 p.m. there is no information of any bodies having been found, although as in all such cases there are various reports and opinions expressed.

The master of the schooner Emma, who picked up the survivors, states that he was proceeding down Channel, and being below in his berth he was hurriedly called on deck by the mate in charge and told there were signs of a heavy gale coming on. On reaching the deck he immediately gave orders to guard against the evidently impending danger by taking in all the sail he had set. The mate then told the master that a short time previous he saw a man of war ahead, but new she was nowhere to be seen, and on nearing the spot where she was last seen he saw the men he had picked up floating about, but did not see any other bodies. He states that the gale and snowstorm was the most violent he ever witnessased, as it came to its height almost suddennly.

The schoomer and her crew have been detained by order of the Commander-in-Chief, in case the eNvdence of the men should be required at any court of inquiry that may hereafter be hold. The sad calamity has caused a heavy gloom to spread over the place and neighbourhood, where so many of the relatives of the unfortunate officers and crew reside.

Her Majesty sent a telegram to-day to the Commander-in-Chief for all particulars, and to express her grief at the sad occurrence.

PORTSMOUTH, MONDAY EVENING

A steamer has just come in from the scene of the wreck, but no bodies have been found. Divers have been down, but they could not penetrate to the lower deck. All the sails are set. Thy wreck is not more than a mile and a half from the shore.

TELEGRAMS FROM THE QUEEN.

The following telegrem has bean received at Portsea from General Ponsonby at Windsor:-

"The Queen is deeply grieved to hear of the loss of the Eurydice. Her Majesty anxiously asks for further parlculars."

In accordance with the Royal request all available intelligence was transmitted to the Queen.

The following telegram from the Queen to the First Lord of the Admiralty. dated Windsor, 4.5 p.m., was received at the Admiralty is the early part of last evening:—

"The Queen would ask Mr. Smith to intake known her grief at the terrible calamity of the Eurydice, and her heartfelt sympathy with the afflicted parents and relatives."

The subjoined particulars of the deplorable event are gleaned from various sources :—

Captain Somerset, the senior officer at Bermuda, in a letter of the 6th inst., reports that the Eurydice arrived on 25th February from Antigua, and sailed 6th March for Portsmouth. She had on board, besides her own otficera and crew, one ship's corporal, nine marines and time-expired men, six military time-expired men, two naval invalids, and three court-martial prisoners. The names of these men are not yet known.

Captain Hare, who commanded the Euydice, and Lieutenant Tabor, the first lieutenant, were firat-rate seamen and were selected by the late Mr. Ward Hunt especially for their good qualities in this respect. The cruise had been a most successful one.

When the Eurydice, on February 14, parted cornpsny with the training-briga Martin and Liberty, which arrived home last Thursday, the Eurydice was proceeding to Antigua to refit. During the voyage, several ordinary seamen were promoted by Captain Hare to the rank. of A.B.'s.

A telegram from Ventnor on Monday morning says:— "The sudden capsizing of her Majesty's ship Eurydice yesterday afternoon, and the lose of some 313 live, has cast a gloom over our little town, and this morning broke without revealing any speck on the wide expanses of water giving hope of further lives saved. The only two known surivors— Benjamin Cuddiford and Sidney Fletcher—are progressing favourably, and are quite as will as could be expected after such a prolonged immersion on such a wintry day. The masts of the ill-fated frigate are now visible about two miles from shore, off Lucombe. As there was a strong ebb tide at the time of the disaster and a strong north wind blowing no bodies are likely to wash ashore here. The Eurydice passed Ventnor at 3.15 with a heavy press of sail, and this attracted considtrable attention and admiration. Within half an hour from that time the weather, which bad been bright, suddenly changed, and a strong gust having caught the sails caused her at once to capsize and sink. But for the schooner Emma passing at the time nothing would have been known of the disaster, as for fully half an hour every object was obscurod by a blinding snowstorm, and it would have been thought that the ship had gone on safely to Spithead."

At Portsmouth yesterday morning, on the loss of the Eurydice becoming known, a large number of relatives and friends of the men on board flocked to the dockyard to obtain information. Nothing, however, was made known beyond the bare announcement of the disaster posted on the dockyard gates. One of the tugs which started for the scene of the casualty on Sunday night returned yesterday and took out a large party of shipwrights and riggers and the diving apparatus. The crew of the tug report that at low water her lower yards are just visible above water. She appears to have been in full sail when caught in the squall, and the only sail failed, as far as can at present be ascertained, was the main royal. According to competent opinion ths Eurydice was backed sharp upon the port tack when seized by the squall. The foretopgallant mast and the main royal are broken off, andthis may be taken as indicative of the strength and severity of the squall.

A correspondent, telegraphing from Ventnor yesterday morning, says— "It was a sudden squall from land which upset the Eurydice whilst taking in sail. She immediately heeled over on her beam. All the boats were swept away. She was going at the rate of 15 miles an hour. Some men jumped overboard, but nearly all stuck to the ship, and the captain remained till the last. The ship rapidly filled with water, and in a few minutes went down head foremost. Cuddiford thinks that many were killed instantaneously at the time the sheip heeled over. He jumped overboard himself just before the ship went down. Looking around him he could only see about 30 come to the surface, amongst them being the two doctors, who were both swimming. The first lieutenant, Mr. Tabor, and a captain of the Royal Engineers had seized hold of a wash-deck locker. For some time after Cuddiford had taken hold of the buoy he could not see land. He estimates the time they were in the water at about one hour and 20 minutes. Fletcher, the other survivor, hailed him and they were making for the shore when they were picked op by the schooner Emma, whose atention they attracted by raising their hands and shouting out. There were 30 passengers on board, seven members of the ROyal Engineers, six prisoners, one in irons, the others in cells. Fletcher was saved by fortunately picking up a cork life-belt from the ship's life-boat. Benjamin Cuddiford is an able seaman and Sidney Hatcher an ordinary seaman. Fletcher was on the watch below decks. When he found the ship heeling over he rushed on deck, and found the ship's gunwale under water. A violent squall and snowstorm prevailed at the time of the wreck. 1Lieutenant Tabor was picked up alive, but died on the schooner Emma. The captain of Engineers was picked up dead. This narrative is obtained from the survivors this morning."

A telegram from Portstmouth at noon yesterday says: —"The excitement here is intense, and many unfounded rumours are circulatiog. One statement has been spread to the effect that the captain and two midshipmen of the Eurydice had been picked up alive, but no such tidings have been received at the Admiralty offices, and the report is therefere discredited. The admiral and the captain of the Steam Reserve have gone to the wreck, and a despatch-boat has just been sent from the flag-ship with provisions for the working party at the wreck. By all nautical men the Eurydice was looked upon as one of the finest sailing frigates in the service, and the feeling among them is one of universal surprise at such a catastrophe having overtaken her. She was at one time commanded by Admiral Sir George Elliot, who was remarkably well pleased with her. The relatives of the officers and crew continue to  present themselves in large numbers at the Admiralty offices here seeking for Information. In some cases a wife or a mother has been sent to the scene of the disater, so as to be near at hand in case of any others being rescued alive or their remains recovered. Hopes are still entertained that some of the crew may yet be heard of as having been washed ashore elsewhere or picked up in the Channel. The severity of the weather on Sunday, however, renders this theory extremely improbable. The Government steamers continue to cruise round in hopes of gaining some tidings. The inquest on the remains of the four men picked up has not yet been fixed."

The indications are that her sails were not blown away by the squall, and the consequently she was laid on her beam-ends, and it is surmised that the ports being open she immediately filled and sank. The Eurydice being a fine statch ship, it is believed there wil be no difficulty in raising her. She was a fully rigged ship. She was a wooden ship of 921 tons. She is ths described in the Navy List:-

MORE COLUMNS WITH NO RELIABLE OCR POSSIBLE - LIST OF NAMES AND BIOGRAPHIES


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780328/107/0005

Isle of Wight Times

Thursday 28 March 1878

p5

OFF THE ISLE OF WIGHT. 300 OR 400 LIVES LOST.

Her Majesty's training ship Eurydice, returning from a cruise to the West Indies with a crew of young seamen, capsized on Sunday afternoon, about four o'clock, during a heavy snowstorm, and sudden and tremendously heavy squall, about live miles off Dunnose. A schooner picked up five of the crew, but two soon died. and another— Tabor, the first lieutenant, soon followed. The remainder of the officers and crew, said to be between and 300 and 400 in all, were drowned. Dunnose is a headland near the centre of the south-east coast of the Isle of Wight, between Shanklin and Sandown. The two men saved are Benjamin Cuddeford. first-class seaman, of Plymouth, and Sydney Fletcher, a first-class boy, of Bristol, aged 19. Cuddeford was among the last on the ship. Captain Marcus Hare, he says, was near him when the ship went down, sucking many with her. A man near him said a vessel was close by when the squall came up, and, therefore, they would be sure to be picked up. He was over an hour in the water. Being a first-rate swimmer everyone called to him for help. He tried to assist two or three, but at last four clung to him, and he was obliged to kick them off. He was well taken care of by the master of the schooner and the crew. The ship left Bermuda three weeks ago. She passed the Lizard on Sunay, and expected to anchor at Spithead about five o'clock. These two men were well provided for at the Cottage Hospital. Bonchurch, and placed under the care of Dr. Williamson, of Ventnor.

The Eurydice, a sailing vessel of 921 tons burden, was commissioned in Portsmouth in 1877, as a training ship for second-class ordinary seamen, and sent to the Barbadoes station. Most of the unfortunate young men are believed to belong to Portsmouth. Two tugs were sent from Portsmouth as soon as the sad news reached Admiral Fanshawe.

The circumstances are similar in many respects to those attending the loss of the Captain, both ships having turned over and sunk during a gale of wind, all their sail being at the time set. So far as can be ascertained the Eurydice had 368 souls on board at the time, though this is very much a mater of conjecture, as, besides her own offciers and crew, she was bringing home a number of military offciers, supernumeraries, and invalids from the West Indies. Hence considerable uncertainty exists as to the names and numbers of the sufferers. The Eurydice was a wooden sailing, fully-rigged ship of 921 tons displarsimeat, and was at one time considered one the smartest and quickest 26 gun frigates in the service. She was built about 1843. Last year she was converted into a training ship for ordinary seamen at Mr. John White's yard at Cowes, and was completed for sea at Portsmouth Dockyard. oShe was commissioned on the 7th of February, 1877, and finally sailed from Portsmouth on the 13th of November with a crew of about 300 ordinary seamen and the officers named below. All the officers and crew are lost, with the exception of two seamen. Captain Hare had been at one time commander of the St. Vincent, training-ship at Portsmouth, and was selected for the command from his knowledge and experience of young seamen. Lieutenant Tabor was a thoroughly efficient sailor, having had command of the Cruiser in the Mediterranean. The Eurydice was accompanied from Portsmouth by the training brig Martin, and was eventually joined at Madeira by the Liberty from Plymouth. All the vessels were filled with ordinary seamen, whom it was considered necessary to inure to the sea by a long cruise ; and, as they were all draughted from the home training-ships, the distress caused by their loss is spread over the whole country. They were, of course, mostly unmarried men, and in this respect the crew differ from that of the Captain, who were principally able-bodied seamen and petty officers. The Liberty arrived at Portsmouth a few days ago, the Eurydice being detained for the purpose of taking up supernumeraries. Captain Hare, however, informed Lieutenant-Commander Hicks that he expected to be home almost as soon as the Martin.

Cuddeford made the following statement to the Admiralty authorities:–

"At 7 bells on Sunday afternoon, the 24th inst., the watch at a quarter to 4 o'clock was called to take in lower studding-sails. I was on deck to tend the lower tack, and let it go. The captain gave orders to take in the upper sails. The wind was then freshening. The captain ordered the men to come down from aloft, and then to let go the topsail halliards. The gunner's mate let go the topsail halliards, and another man, Bryans, let go the mainsheets. The water was then running over the lee netting on the starboard aide, and washed away the cutter. The foretopmast studding-sail was set. The wind was about a point abaft the port beam. I caught hold of the main trues, fell, and caught hold of the weathernetting, and got on the ship's side. We could see her keel. She righted a little before going down, bringing the mizzen topsail out of the water. She then went gradually over from forward, the greater part of the hands being at the fore part of the ship outside. She then turned over, bringing the port cutter bottom upwards. I and another, Richards, cut the foremost gripe, and then saw the captain standing on the vessel's side near the quarter boat and the two doctors struggling in the water. I swam some distance, keeping over my head a lifebuoy, which I found, and then picked up some piece of wreck, which I gave to some of the men in the water. I then came across the copper punt full of water, five men were in it. The sea capsized the punt, and they all got on the bottom. They asked me if there was any signs of help. I told them the best thing they could do was to keep their spirits up. One of them was just letting go his hold of the punt. I do not know his name. I next saw Mr. Brewer, the boatswain, with a cork lifebelt on. He was struggling strongly. I then saw Fletcher in the water with a cork belt and breaker. I lost sight of him during the snow. About five minutes afterwards the weather cleared up. I saw Fletcher again and we kept together. Then we saw land, but, finding it too rough, we turned our backs to the land and saw a schooner. The schooner bore down on us, sent a boat, and picked up two offciers that I had not previously noticed with a wash-deck locker. A rope's end was thrown to me from the schooner, and I was then picked up. I judge that I was in the water one hour and 20 minutes. The officers picked up were Lieutenant Tabor and a captain of the Royal Engineers who came on board at Bermuda with one corporal, one bombardier, four privates, and a servant of an officer of the Royal Engineers. The ship capsized about 10 minutes to 4. The captain was giving orders at the time, and was carrying out his duty. We rounded on the weather beam, and set the lower studding-sail at 2p.m. The ship was then going 8 1/2 knots. I don't know who was the officer of the watch as the captain was carrying on the duty. The Hon Mr. Giffard went to the wheel to help at the time the water was coming over the lee nettines in consequence of an order being given to put the helm up. There were the following supernumeraries on board:— Three Court-martial prisoners from the Rover; one A. B., a Court-martial prisoner from Bermuda; an ordinary seaman named Parker, who bad been tried by Court-martial (he belonged to the Eurydice) ; and about 12 or 14 Marines, with one sergeant of Marines from Bermuda Dockyard, two invalids from Bermuda Hospital, one ships' corporal from the Argus, one captain's cook from the Argus, one engineer's steward from the Argus, one ship's cook from Bermuda Dockyard, one quartermaster, named Nicholas, from the Rover. I believe some of the maindeck ports were open to let in the air to the maindeck mess. I don't think the hands were turned up; there was hardly time for that. I saw most of the men forward take off their clothes and jump off before I lost sight of them in the squall. When the snow cleared up the ship was gone down."

THE INQUEST

Was opened ar the Queen's Hotel, the Esplanade, Ventnor, at one o'clock yesterday, by ? Blake, Esq., coroner for the Isle Wight, and a jury of which  W. Mew Judd was foreman. —The inquest was on the bodies of Lieut. Franics Hope Tabor, Capt. Louis Ferrier, and – Bennett.

The Coroner said that before opening he must express his deep concoern— in which he was sure they all shared, and every one who had heard of the sad occurrence which had called them together— which had resulted in the loss of a large number of valuable lives, when they were really almost in reach and sight of their destination. It was a very important eqnquiry. Although they were only nominally inquiring into the deaths of three persons, a hundred times that number had met their deaths from the same cause, and he was quite sure they would give this matter their meet serious attention, and he hoped the evidence would be such as to enable them to arrive at a satisfactory reason for this sad disaster.

After viewing the bodies the jury adjourned to the Royal Hotel.

Robt. Montague Tabor,of Carshalton, Surrey, deposed that he had seen the bodies. One was that of his brother—Francis Hope Tabor, a lieutenant in the navy. Last saw him alive five or six months ago, in Kent. He went to the West Indies, and was on his way home from Bermuda in the Eurydice. He expected him daily. Thought he would have been 30 in July.

Benjamin Cuddeford deposed that he was an able seaman. l'he bodies viewed were those of Lieut. Tabor, a man named Bennett, and a Captain of the Royal Engineers [Captain Ferrier] who took a passage home in the ship. Bennett was captain of the quarter deck. The Eurydice was a wooden sailing ship-4 guns. One trip before this she was employed as a training ship, and had been 13 months' in commission. Lately she had been all round the West India Islands, witness being aboard her. Her captain was Capt. Marcus Hare. They left Bermuda on the 6th March for Portsmoutb. There were over 300 persons aboard, including supernumeraries. The greater part of the crew were ordinary seamen. There were about 30 ship's company—attached to the ship. On Sunday they were about two hours' sail from Spithead just before 2 p.m.—off the Isle of Wight. They set the lower studdingsail. They had all plain sail set before--all except the topgallant studdingsails. The weather was then very fine. There was just a moderate breeze, just abaft the beam. Between 3.30 and 4 o'clock the captain called the port watch to take in the lower studdingsal. The wind was coming on. Ihe sail was taken in. Then the Captain gave orders for the Royal yardmen aloft to take in the Royals. They were not taken in. The captain ordered the men down at once, and sail let go the mainsheet and topsail halyards. That was for the men's safety —the squad just caught them then. He believed the royals were lowered but not furled. The Captain gave orders to let go the maintopsail halyard and main sheet. That was done. The ship was pretty near on her beam ends. Heard the captain say "If you can't let it go cut it." The men on the lee were up to their waist in water then. He expected it must have been the foresheet. Witness was on the quarter deck at the time. He then crawled up the quarter deck netting over the ship's side, and saw all the sails in the water. He got up to get on the weather side of the ship. He could then see the ship's keel, and her sails were in the water. She righted a few feet, and he saw her mizzen topsail come out of the water. Then he looked forward and saw the ship sinking from forward taking a lot of men with her who were outside the ship. The water gradually increased aft, and just as it got in a line with the mainmast she turned right over, and the port cutter was bottom upwards. Ihe ship's keel was right out of water. He stuck to the ship. The captain gave orders to try and get the port cutter clear. He and another man went, and they got one gripe clear by cutting it with a knife. Then the water encroached. The captain was just behind him at the side of the ship. Richards, who was assisting him (witness), was swept away, and he saw him no more. The cutter was not got clear. He jumped overboard and passed the two doctors drowning, but could not give them any assistance. Many others were in the water then. Witness swam to a round life buoy, and took some pieces of wreck— wood and spars— going to the assistance of others. The captain was still on the vessel when witness jumped over, and the vessel went down almost immediately afterwards. He saw six men on the bottom of a boat. They asked if there was any hopes, and he said the best thing was to keep their spirits up. One let go with the cold. Of those on the bottom of the boat were Mason, Martin, another cook's mate being brought home. The others were ordinary seamen ; he didn't know their names. He saw Mr. Brewer, boatswain, with a lifebelt. He believed the cook's mate had been left behind from the Tamar. Fletcher was close to him, and when the mist cleared they saw land and made for it till they were picked up. Thought he was swimming about an hour and 20 minutes. Fletcher, an ordinary seaman, was also picked up by the schooner. He (witness) caught hold of the rope's end they chucked at him, but turned dizzy afterwards.— A violent snowstorm came on. They were not tacking at the time. The squall came on between 3.30 and 4. They could not see that the storm was coming on: he could not see—he was at work. He didn't see land at all—he didn't go above the netting to see—that was about 2ft above his head. The ports were open on each side. The sub. lieutenant, the Hon. – Gifford, went to assist at the wheel— five men were at the wheel, and the sub-lieutenant at the weather wheel. The helm was put up after they tried to take in the Royal. They did their best to put the helm up —couldn't say whether they did or not. The ports were 4 or 5ft. above the water when the ship was on even keel. The guns did not shift. There was one watch below deck— about 150, and all the supernumeraries— when the first order was given to shorten sail. Some were lying down asleep, and some writing. She had 10 ports and two small ones— all on the upper deck. When the first order was given to shorten sail no order was given to those below —it was not an order to all hands. 150 in the watch on deck was sufficient for shortening sail. When the squall commenced—when the captain saw it coming, he gave the order to shorten sail. Witness experienced most snow in the water than he did before. The officer of the watch was Sub-Lieut. Randolph. He was forward assisting in taking in the lower studdingsail.

By Mr. Tabor: The captain gave the order to set the lower studdingsail.

By others: We run in the weather braces, then set the lower studdingsail. The captain said heave the log, and the reply was 8 knots. That was about 2 o'clock. The main deck being very close, they had the ports open. It was quite usual on such an afternoon as Sunday afternoon, to have the porta open. Didn't see Capt. Hare after he (witness) jumped over. The ship went down about five minutes after she was on her beam ends. There was no time to lower boats—the lower starboard boat was swamped away. The galley was smashed. On Sunday the rule is to pipe down. Saw the captain on deck before it began to look dirty. There was a life buoy on each side the bridle, and one on each bow of the launch, forward, and one right astern. There were only five on deck. There were about twelve life belts. These were in one of the launches, having been moved the day before for painting.

By Mr. Harvey (representing the Admiralty): Directly the captain observed the squall coming, he immediately ordered the taking in of the lower studdingsail— the largest sail in the ship. This was done. The men were in the act of lowering the Royals, when the captain gave the order, Let go the maintopsail halyards and main sheet. In the act of going up, and before doing this, they were ordered down. He supposed the captain was afraid the top?allantmast and royal mast would be carried away. He supposed it was for their safety. There were two cutters—port and starboard. It took 10 to man one, and 12 another, besides coxswains. There would be a life belt for each man in each cutter. The rule was to keep one life belt for each cutter.Three life belts were packed up. The squall came all of a sudden, and she went on her beam ends immediately. It was a sudden gust— almost say it gave no warning. As one of the ship's company, he didn't expect that any such thing would take place. He had been on her 13 months. It was very fine weather just before —nice steady breeze. He thought everything was done that could be done, both to save the vessel and the men's lives. She behaved very well in a gale is the Bay of Biscay going out. All the time witness wait on deck, the Capain and Lieut. Tabor were there. The Engineer Captain was there too. Considered the captain and officers thorough seamen. Had been 21 years in the navy. During that time he sever saw a squall come so quickly. Sundays was a quiet day, and Thursday afternoons was for mending clothes— if fine weather. Thought 150 hands enough to save the vessel, if anything more could have been done. There was no time to do anything. If she had been braced sharp up, it would have taken all hands. If the whole company had been on deck, they would have been in one another's way. Didn't think the least blame attached to any of the officers.

By jurors: When thrown on her beam ends, he thought only a few would have any chance of getting up on deck. When the main sheet was let go, and topsail halyards, it had no effect.

Captain George Henry Ferrier deposed that he belonged to the 105th Light Infantry, now quartered at Colchester. He recognised one of the bodies as that of his brother, Captain Louis John George Ferrier, quartered in Bermuda. He appeared to have come home on leave in the Eurydice. Had not heard that he was coming home. Didn't know whether he had any duty aboard. He was now in his 38th year.

Sydney Fletcher deposed that he was 19 years of age. He was a first-class ordinary seaman aboard the Eurydice. He came in her from Bermuda, having been aboard six months. Last Sunday afternoon he was below between 12 and 4. He was getting his tea to come on at eight bells, when he heard a rush of water on the main deck—in through the ports. She had been going very steady. Just before he heard the water, he found she gave a lurch. He lowered the half port and ran on deck. The water was coming in over her lee netting, and he assisted another man in overhauling the foretopsail halyards. He got over the weather netting, and walked on the ship's side —right aft on the quarter. She was right on her side— he walked below her ports. As soon as he got aft he saw the keel of the ship right out of water. It was blowing hard and snowing, and the sea was breaking right over the ship. He believed the main yard touched the water. Saw the captain standing on the quarter— giving orders. They could not cut the after gripe of the cutter, as it was too late— she was under water. He picked up a life belt, and got away from the ship about 30 yards. She was then nearly under water. The captain was on the side, and Mr. Edmunds, sub-lieutenant, took off his coat and jumped over. Didn't see him after. Saw Mr. Tabor with no cap on. Saw him on a wash-deck locker in the sea. Witness was saved by a life belt, which fell out of one of the cutters. When he saw a schooner yards off he felt so full of joy he didn't know what to do. Bennett had been floating by him. Was in the water an hour and twenty minutes before he was picked up. Then he was insensible. Before the ship lurched he had not noticed the wind blowing harder. His mess was right against the fore hatchway. Didn't think that of the whole watch more than two besides himself got up. Many tried to do so—he heard them making a row, crying and screaming. He was close to the hatchway, and that was how he escaped. He saw Mr. Brewer in the water. Didn't see a great many others. Couldn't say how long the snow storm lasted. It snowed when he jumped off. He got within about half a mile of and then saw the schooner. Should think there were 26 or 38 life belts aboard. The greater part were kept in the pinnaces—boomboat. On ordinary occasions the belts could be easily got at—when the ship was sailing.

By Jurors: Did not see the ship go down. Belioved there was only one man below in irons. Water was partly her ballast.

By the Coroner: This water, being consumed during the voyage, would become lighter towards the close. Could not say what water was left on Sunday. Neither stores nor guns had shifted.

By Mr. Tabor: When he got on deck all was confusion. Lieut. Tabor was in his shirt sleeves. Didn't know whether he was mistaken, as he was picked up with his uniform coat on—he might have been.

By Mr. Harvey : The heeling over and the rushing in of water were instantaneous. lie heard the captain giving the orders, and the men would have got out the cutter if they could. It had been fine up to the very minute, and they were sailing along as they had been all day. Didn't know what the ballast of the ship really consisted of. He knew some ballast was iron. He always understood that the water was taken in for ballast as well as for drink. He didn't understand this as regarded every ship. He had been told on board that water was partly her ballast. Was not sure she had iron ballast. He said partly water, meaning the other part stores. Had never been down to see. Didn't know anything about her ballast —only water. He overhauled the halyards for about two minutes before he got up and out on the side. Thought the ship went down in 7 or 8 minutes after she was struck. All had a chance of getting the life belts in the pinnace —not after she heeled over.

By a Juror: The captain's order was as the port cutter. Could not see the other.

Cuddleford (recalled) by Jurors, said the Eurydice had proper ballast for her tonnage– the lower tier of tanks was never disturbed. She was more lively when they ran rather short. If she gave a cant she would throw you off your legs. Never heard during the voyage that any ballast had shifted. If it had shifted, hands would have had to put it right. She went down with her masts on one side—under water. The mizzenmast showed out of water. There was no chance getting to it.—Didn't know the state of the barometer. Had there been a sudden change by 8 in the morning he should have heard.

William Langworthy Jenkin deposed that he was master the schooner "Emma " of Padstow. On Sunday he was proceeding from Newcastle to Poole. lie encountered a sudden squall about ten minutes past four. He was off Dunnose. Yes he had warning. It looked rather bad to windward before the squall came on. He hauled down the flying jibs, maintopmast staysail, gaff topsail, lowered the mainsail away, the gallant and topsail halyards, boom jib and fore staysail. He afterwards lowered the foresail down. They had only the standing jib set properly. They did it during the squall, which he supposed lasted half-an-hour. Supposed he was four or five miles from land when the squall took them. He saw it approaching. It rose very black. There was a fall of snow too. Didn't see the Eurydice before she went down. After the snow cleared away he saw something floating on the water. He sent a man in the rigging to see what it was. Another man reported he fancied he saw a man in the water. He set the mainsail &c., and went right towards what was floating. They heard cries in the water. They found five men in the water- well on for a quarter of a mile apart from one another. They were all insensible when on deck and very much exhausted. The five were Cuddeford and Fletcher and the three bodies viewed. He got them in the cabin, and stripped them and rubbed them and then came on to Ventner. Should think it was three or four miles from land where he picked them up. They would not take any stimulant. Cuddeford and Fletcher had some coffee. The others could not take anything. A boat came off and he sent ashore for a doctor, and two came. One man was dead when picked up—Bennett. Lieut. Tabor had his uniform on. Two others died aboard. Thought it was only a boat's crew when he picked up the men. Had not seen the Eurydice. His schooner was 137 tons register. The crew was six hands all told. He was laden with coals— light cargo. The wind was W.N.W., should think a vessel 4 or 5 miles from shore would have a better chance of seeing it than one a mile or mile and a-half. He didn't make much preparation till the squall struck. He had no stimulants aboard. Those who died were too far gone to take it if they could have had it.

By Jurors: Saw a barque after the squall. Only saw the five men in the water—no wreckage. The tide was running strongly to the westward. There was no sign of the Eurydice. They couldn't see any more. They didn't sail about. Three had belts on, one a lifebuoy and another a box. Couldn't see the length of the vessel when the snow fell. It took him 30 minutes to take his sails in and it was pretty well over then. They didn't take in any sail till they felt the first weight of the wind. He didn't think it was going to be near so heavy. Had often experienced a stronger squall—perhaps not a more sudden one. A squall might strike with different force and effect on two objects within half a mile of each other.

James Mann Williamson deposed that he was a Doctor of Medicine. On Sunday afternoon he went aboard the schooner. He found three persons in the cabin. Coddeford was half dressed. He was sensible, but apparently suffering from shock, and the other two were apparently dead. Dr. Martin arrived there before, and had been using every means to restore animation in Lieut. Tabor. He attempted to restore animation to the body of as. Ferrier. Did not discover any signs of life. - Dr. Martin thought Lieut. Tabor's head pulsated very slightly, but witness could not feel that. Bennett was dead. He believed all died from drowning. Froth exuded from Mr. Tabor's mouth.

George Parkinson, able seaman, deposed that he was aboard the schooner on Sunday afternoon. He saw the Eurydice before the storm came on—about ten minutes before. She was going up, and they down channel. All the sail was on the Eurydice so far as he could see. When he first saw her, he didn't consider she had too much sail for her safety. After the squall came on, he could not see anything– and he never saw the ship again :didnlt look for her. He saw it coming up black but didn't think it was going to be anything, as it was so long coming. Never saw anything so heavy, after being so long rising. There was only a moderate breeze while he saw the Eurydice. She was about a mile from land. Witness' vessel was four or five. They didn't lower sails till the squall struck.

By Mr. Harvey : He was surprised to hear of the loss of the Eurydice, though he was in the same squall. Had experienced a deal heavier ones. Had seen a squall act more on one vessel than another, when near— had seen one dismantled and not the other. Looking at the weather before the squall, he didn't think the Eurydice had too much canvas. The squall would strike the Eurydice first.

Sgt. Ransom produced the watch which be received from Dr. Martin, who attended Capt. Ferrier. It stopped at eight minutes to four.

Mr. E. J. Harvey (who is the Admiralty Law Agent for Portsmouth) called John Flynn, a commissiosed boatman in the Coastguard, of Ventnor, who produced photographs of a storm which passed over Cowes a year or two ago. The "Globe" was destroyed, and the next house escaped. He produced a photograph to show that it had cut like a knige thriugh some trees in a Copse near Cowes. It showed that a squall at sea would strike one vessel and not another—he had seen that himself. In the Chinese seas he had seen junks blow over, and others not touched.

The Coroner (the above being all the evidence) then summed up the several depositions to the jury –reminding them of the most important points. He said he did not think it necessary to offer many observations, the facts were so short and simple. It seldom happened that in a disaster of this magnitude the facts were so simple and clear. It was not a case of collision where there might be a conflict of evidence as to the cause at the collision, as to whether it it might have been occasioned by want of a sufficient look-out or observation of the rules of the road of the sea, or any similar cause. It was not a case of a vessel striking on a rock, which might or might not be due to any want of care or skill on the part of the person navigating the vessel The question in this case was whether the parties responsible for the safety of this vessel did observe or did not observe that care, caution, and skill, which it was imperative upon them to exercise upon the occasion. It seemed to him that the questions for them to consider were— was the capsizong of this unfortunate ship owing either to her carrying too much sail, and if not whether there was sufficient promptitude on the part of the commander in lowering the sails when he saw that a storm was upon him. Another question which bad been incidentally mentioned, was whether it might have been due in any measure to any want of sufficient ballast. There did not appear to be anything to suggest that there was any danger in the sails which the ship was carrying before she was struck. Cuddeford said the weather was fine and there was a moderate breeze, but be was not on deck to observe whether a storm was approaching, or not. The seaman of the Emma didn't observe anything dangerous or unusal  in the quantity of sail. The next question was— did the Captain use all promptitude and care in giving orders, and were those orders obeyed as far as they could be in taking down the sails. If they believed the evidenee, and there was no reason to doubt it, the Captain did exercise care and promptitude, and remained on the vessel till she went down. If so, there would be no blame attaching to any person.– After alluding to the question of ballast, the Coroner said the Eurydice being much nearer the shore, her captain would not be likely to observe the storm coming so soon as the master of the schooner. He thought the jury could only arrive at the conclusion that it was an accidental circumstance.

The Jury retired and were absent nearly an hour. On their return, the foreman announced that they unanimously found "that Louis J. C. Ferrier, Francis Hope Tabor, and – Bennett, were accidentally drowned, owing to the capsizing of H.M.S. Eurydice, by a sudden squall off Dunnose on Sunday the 24th inst., and the Jury consider from the evidence adduced, that no blame whatever can be attached to the captain, officers, or men of the ship.

There is something of a personal sorrow which must affect every Englishman when he reads a narrative of this kind. We are all proud of the quality of our seamen, and of the courage with which they expose themselves to a life of constant peril. We cannot but mourn over the untimely loss of so many brave and promising fellows. The disaster is intensified in poignancy by the circumstances under which it happaned. Death of one's native land, after a long separation from near and dear friends, is a terrible thing. The joyous hope, the buoyant expectation, the thrill of delight with which the shores of Old England fill the home-coming sailors are changed into the wild cry of despair and wail of drowning men. On such a picture we have no morbid fancy for dwelling. It will haunt, during these coming weeks, many an English home. In scores of cottages hearts have beat high with hope, the simple preparations of affection have been made, and parents have counted the hours till they should clasp their stalwart sailor-lads in their arms once more. And now the desolation of death has turned their joy into a terrible sorrow. The cruel, merciless sea has robbed them of the bright boys of whom they were so proud. England shares their sorrow. If it be any consolation to the bereaved relatives of those who have gone down in the Eurydice, they may be sure that not an English heart beats but does not sympathise with them in their great sorrow, and deeply deplore the calamity which has robbed the country of more than 300 of her brave defenders.




---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780330/016/0006#

Isle of Wight Observer 

Saturday 30 March 1878

p6
CAPSIZING oF H.M.S. "EURYDICE"  
OVER 300 LIVES LOST.

On Sunday afrernoon, one of the most sudden and terrific snow squalls whica we ever remember at tnis time of the year, passed over Ryde, making tne waters in the Solent rise in white-capped breakers in a wonderfully short space of time and those who witnessed its effects on the waters think of the "poor souls at sea." Although accidents were anticipated, the imagination of no one compassed such a terrible event as that which then occurred at the back of the Wight. In the course of the evening it was whispered, with bated breath, that one of Her Majesty's ships had been overset off Ventnor, and the dreadful rumour was, of course, treated at first as a canard. Its correctness was, however, subsequentiy verifed, and the excitement which reigned may be easily imagined, more especially on the following morning, when the news of the sad disaster was spread abroad far and wide. At Ventnor, however, the excitement was most intense. On Sunday afternoon the weather wss comparatively fine and miid, and there were more than tne usual number of visitors on the esplanade. About 4 o'clock all eyes were turned to a pleasant sight. Close to the shore, and easily distinguished, was H.M.S. Eurydice, which was bowling along uuder a press of canvas, with a stiff breeze, at a fine rate. Soon, however, the sky be- came overcast, and it became evident that a storm wa-s coming on, and the vessel was watched by the "old salts" with some interest. As they noted tne storm gathering, their verdict was "that fellow will soon have to shorten sail." The snow storm which came on, however, soon drove the promenaders to their homes, and hid the ship from all, and she was not seen again. The sudden squall caught her off Dunnose, and she Was overturned in a moment, and went down with over 300 men. Only five of these were picked up. The schooner Emma, which was passing, picked up five men — Lieutenant Tabor, Captain Ferrier, R.E., Bennett, Cuddiford, and Fletcher, a first-class boy, but the first three of these died before reaching the shore. The ship was commissioned at Portsmouth uu the 7th of February, 1877, and was ordered to the West Indies. She was now bound for Spithead. Cuddiford states that the ship capsized in a squall and snow storm, five mils off Dunnose, about 4 o' clock. More than 3OO men were on board, all of whom, he believes, are lost, excepting himself and Fletcher. Cuddiford was amongst the iast on the ship. Captain Hare was with him when the ship went down, sucking many with it. Cuddiford and a man near him said that a vessel was close by when the squall came on, and, therefore, they would be sure to be picked up. He was over an hour in the water, and, being a good swimmer, every one called out to him for help. He tried to assist two or three, but at last four clung to him, and he was obdged to kick tnem off. He was well taken care of by tne master and crew of the schooner. The ship left Bermuda three weeks ago, passed the Lizaid on Sunday, and was expected to anchor at Spithead about, 5 o'clock.

The following list of officers on board is given in the *Navy List*: Captain, Marcus A. S. Hare; Lieuteuants, Francis H. Tabor. Charles Y. Strange, William E. Black, Stanley A Burney; Staff-surgeon, James L. Whitney; Paymaster, Frank Pittman; Sub-Lieutenants, the Hon. Edward R. Gifford, Herbert S. Edmonds, Walter S. Smith, Sidney G. Randolph ; Surgeon, Robert Murdoch, M. B. ; gunner, Frederick Aden ; boatswains, William Brewer, Joseph Warren ; assistant clerk, William Lamont.

FURTHER PARTICULARS

The Eurydice was a wooden sailing, fully-rigged ship of 921 tons displacement, and was at one time considered one of tne smartest and quickest 26 gun frigates in the service. She was built about 1843. Last year she was conveted into a training-ship for orainary seamen at Mr John White's yard at Cowes, and was completed for sea at Portsmouth dockyard. She was commissioned on the 7th of February, 1877, and finally sailed from Portsmouth on the 13th of November with a crew of about 390 ordinary seamen and the officers named above. All the officers and crew are lost, with the exception of two seamen. Captain Hare had been at one time commander of the St. Vincent, training-ship at Portsmouth, and was selected for the command from his knowledge and experience of young seamen. Lieutenant Tabor was a thorougnly efficient sailor, having had command of ihe Cruizer in ihe Mediterranean. The Eurydice Was aocompnied foom Portsmouth by the training- brig Martin, and was eventually joined at Madeira by the Liberty from Plymouth. All the vessels were filled with ordinary seamen, whom it was considered necessary to inure to the sea by a long cruise ; and, as they were all draughted from the home training-snips, the distress caused by their loss is spread over the whole country. They were, of course, mostly unmarried men, and in this respect the crew differ irom that of the Captain, who were principally able-bodied seamen and petty officers. Tne Liberty arrived at Portsmouth a few days ago, the Eurydice being detained for the purpose of taking up supernumeraries. Captain Hare, however, intormed Lieutenant Commander Hicks that he expected to be home almost as soon as the Martin.

THE VOYAGE FROM BERMUDA.

The Euryuice left Bermuda on ihe 6th inst., and nothing was heard uf her until she was seen by tne Coastguard at Bonchurch at 3.30 on Sunday afternoon, bearing for Spithead under all piain sail, and with her port stunsails set on the foretopmast and maintopmast, the object being clearly to arrive at the anchorage at Spithead before nightfall. There was an ominous stillness prevailing at this time. A heavy bank of clouds was coming down from the north-west, aud the glass was falling rapidly. Such wind as there was from the westward, and blew on the port quarter of the ship, The Isle of Wight is of peculiar formation on its southern fringe, having wh it may be considered as a double caast-iiue, extending from Blackgang Chine as far as Shanklin. The inner circle of the Downs reaches a height of 500 feet above the sea, and affords a deceptive shelter to ships well inshore. From the direction in which the Eurydice was steering she would be n comparatively smooth water, so sheltered would she be by the Lowns, until she rounded Dunnose Point, where the disaster occurred. This circumstance will also serve to explain the fact that the schooner Emma, which was near at the time, was not affected by the gale. At 10 minutes to 4 the wind suddenly veered round from the west to the eastward, and a gale, accompanied by a blinding fall of snow, came rushing from the high lands down Luccombe Chine, sinking the Eurydice just a little before the beam, driving her out of her course, which was heading to the north-east, and turning her bows to the east. This is what seems probable, thougn, from the manner in which the sea was concealed by the snow, nothing was seen of her at the supreme moment when she capsized to starboard. The air cleared as suddenly as it became overcast, the wind sinking away at the same time. As soon as anything could be seen, the masts aud top-hamper ot the snip were discerned above the water about 2 3/4 miles E.N.E. off Dunnose - a well-known and lofty landmark between Shanklin and Ventnor. The ship lies in 11 fathoms of water, and from her position she appears to have righted in going down.

RESCUE OF THE SURVIVORS.

Capt. Langworthy Jenkin, master of the Emma, schooner, bound from Newcastle for Poole with coals, was the means of rescuing the survivors, and has brought his ship into Portstmouth to give particulars. He states that at 45 minutes past 4 on Sunday afteruoon, after a heavy squall, the atmosphere cleared, and he observed sume wreckage and the royais of a ship flappiug above the water. He also fancied he heard some one shouting for assistance. He sent a man into the rigging to look out, who reported that he saw a man floating ln the water with a cork jacket. He immediately made sail and stood towards him. Having to tack once to fetch him, he hoisted out boats, which picked up four mem, and one man was picked up from the ship. He did his best to restore their circulation, but one of the men had died before he was got on board. Capt. Jenkins then stood for Ventnor with colours half-mast high, and a boat came off. A doctor was sent for, but two other men died before he arrived. The Coastguard boat afterwards came alongside with Commander Roach, who recognised the body of Lieut. Tabor, the first lieutenant of the Eurydice, and the other as an officer of the Royal Engineers. When the men were picked up, Dunnose bore N.W. by W. three to four miles.

TELEGRAMS FROM THE QUEEN.

During Monday the Commander-in-Chief was in constant communication with Her Majesty and the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and in the course of the day received the following telegrams from the Queen. The first, which came from Her Majesty, was in the following terms: 

"The Queen is deeply grieved to hear of the loss of the Eurydice. Her Majesty anxiously asks for further details."

The second was transmitted to the First Lord of the Admiralty, and was to the following effect :

"The Queen would ask Mr Smith to make kunwn her grief at the terrible calamity to the Eurydice and her heartfelt sympathy with the afflicted friends and relatives."

In another telegram to Mr Smith the Queen said the telegrams had caused us the greatest grief. These telegrams, having been forwarded to Admiral Fanshawe, were promptly posted at the dockyard gates, where they were eagerly read by sympathetic crowds.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780330/016/0006
Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 30 March 1878
p6

THE INQUEST.

The inquest upon the bodies of Lieutenant Francis Hope Tabor, Captain Louis Ferrier, R E , and David Bennett, ordinary seaman, was held on Tuesday afternoon by F. Blake, Esq. coroner, who commenced the proceedings at the Queen's Hotel, Esplanade, Venrnor. The bodies were in a little outhouse near the hotel, and had already been coffined. That of Captain Ferrier especially bore a calm and peaceful expression, betokening that death had been sudden and painless. The white cloths with which they had been covered were sprinkled with beautiful fiowers. As soon as the Coroner, jury, and representatives of the Press had assembled at the Queen's Hotel it was at once perceived that the room placed at their disposal was a great deal too small, and the Coroner asked if a larger room could not be procured. The Freemasons' Tavern was at first suggested, but eventually the proprietor of the Royal Hotel offered the use of a larger room there, and after the jury, of whom Mr. W. M Judd was foreman, had been sworn aud had viewed the body, they adjourned to the Royal Hotel. In opening the proceedings,

The Coroner said he could not forbear expressing his deep concern, which he was sure everybody must share, at the cause which had called them together — an accident which had resulted in the loss of so many valuable lives when they had almost arrived at their destination. This was a most important enquiry, for, though the present inquest was nominally only as to the death of three persons, a hundred times that number had died from the same accident. He asked them to give this evidence their best attention.

The first witness called was,

Robert Montague Tabor, who deposed — I live at Carshorton, Surrey. I have ,seen the bodies which have been viewed by the jury, and identify one of them as that of my brother, Francis Hope Tabor, a lieutenant in the Navy. I last saw him alive about five or six months ago, in Kent. He had since been to the West Indies. He was first lieutenant on board the Eurydice, and was coming home in her. We were expecting him daily. I think he would have been 30 in July.

Benjamin Cuddiford deposed - I am an able sea-man. I have seen the bodies which have been viewed by the coroner and jury, and identify them as those of Lieut. Tabor, a man named Bennett (I don't know his Christian name), and the other is a captain in the Engineers, who took a passage in the ship. I knew him by signt, but did not know his name. Lieut. Tabor was first lieuteuant on board the Eurydice, and I was able seaman on board the same ship. Bennett was captain of the quarter deck. The captain in the Engineers had only taken a passage on board, and was not doing duty. The Eurydice was a wooden sailing ship, and had been employed as a training ship, and had been 13 months in commission. She had lately been over to the West India Islands. I had been on board her all the 13 months. She was cruising out the West India Islands all the winter. Lieut. Tabor was commanding officer. Capt. Hare was on board. We left Bermuda on the 6th of March, for Portsmouth. We had over 300 officers and men ou board. That included supernumaries. I cannot say for certain exactly how many there were. The crew were mostly ordinary seamen. The ship's company was about 30 altogether. Tne others left at the end of the voyage. On Sunday, about 2 o'clock in the afternoon, the ship was off the Isle of Wight, we set the lower tunsail. We had all plain salts set betore that. We had all sails set except topgallant stunsail. The weather was then very fine, and there was a moderate wind just abaft the beam. Between half-past 3 and 4 o'clock they called the lower watch to take in the lower stunsail, the weather looking dirty to windward. It was just coming on to blow tnen. The sail was taken in, and tnen orders were given to take in the royals. The squall caught us before the royals were taken in, and ihe captain ordered the men down for their own safety. The royals were then lowered, but not furled. Then the captain gave orders to let go the maintopsail halyards and main sheet. That was done, and the next order the captain gave was, "If you cau't let it go, cut it." Tne ship was tnen on her beam ends, aud the water up to the men's waists, but I don't know to what the order referred. I was on the quarter deck netting. I got there to get on the Weather side of the ship. I could then see her keel, and her sails were in the water. She righted again in a few feet, and I saw her mizentopsail come out of the wateer. I then saw the ship sinking from forwards, taking down with her a body of men which were on her bottom. The water began to increase aft, and just as the water got abreast of the mainmast the snip turned right over, and her keel was out of water. I stuck to tbe ship. The captain gave orders to get the cutter clear, aud we had got one rope clear by cutting it with a knife, but the water encroached upon us. The captain was about six or seven feet from me. A man by the name of Richardson, who was assisting me, was swept away. The cutter was not got clear. I then jumped overboard and passed two doctors drowning, but couid render them no assistance. There were many others in the water. I swam to a round life-buoy, and then went to the assistance of others with pieces of wood and spars. The captain was on the vessel when I jumped overboard, and the vessel must have gone down immediately afterwards. I called one or two men I knew, aud let them have spars, &c. I saw six men clinging to a boat. They asked me if I thougnt there was any hope. I said, "the best thing they could do was keep tneir spirits up." One of them let go with the cold. I knew some of their names. There was Mason, Martin, and a cook's mate taking his passage home. Tne other three were ordinary seamen, and I do not know their names. I saw Mr Brewer, the boatswain, with a life-buoy. I believe the cook's mate was from the Tamar I turned my back to the squall when it came on, and the oher man (Fletcher) was near me. I tnink I swam about for an hour and 20 minutes before I was picked up by the schooner. Fletcher, an ordinary seaman, was also picked up. I did not see any others picked up. I was sensible when I was picked up, but felt giddy, and staggered when I got on the schooner's deck. It came on a sudden gust, which caught the vessel.

By the Jury.— We were not tacking at the time the squall struck the ship. The squall came on between half-past 3 and 4 o clock. I was on deck but went down and had a basin of tea. We could not see that it was coming on. I did not see any land any time all the afternoon. I did not go above the netting to see it. My work kept me from seeing anything else. The ropes I had to attend to were close to the deck. The ports were open. The squall caught us from the same direction as wee were going. They tried to put up the helm. There were five men at the helm. Tne Hon Gifford was there. I can't say whether they did put it up. Tne ports, when the ship was on an even keel, were about 5ft, above the water. The guns were well secured. There might be one watch below when the order was first given to shorten sail. There were about 150 men and supernumeraies below. There was no order given for all hands to shorten sail. It is not usual to call all hands. The watch on deck were quite sufficient to shorten sail. The captain gave tne order to shorten sail when he saw the squall coming. It was about 4 o'clock when I jumped overooard. Sub-Lieut Randolph was officer of the watch. I could not remember yesterday.

By Mr. Tabor.— I don't know whether the captain was on deck all the afternoon. He gave orders to heave the lead at 2 o'clock, and the reply was "eight knots and a half"

By the Jury.— It is usual, under such circumstances as on Sunday afternoon, to have the ports open. I did not see any more of Capt Hare after I jumped. There was no time given to lower boats. She has four quarter boats. The galley was smashed and no good. I can't say whether the captain was on deck when the weather began to look dirty. There were life-buoys on each side of the bridge, one on each side of the launch, and one astern— five altogether. There were 12 life-belts, which were on deck. The life-buoys floated when the ship went over.

By Mr Harvey.- Directly the captain saw the squall coming he ordered the stansail to be taken in. This was the largest sail in the ship. The captain also gave orders to let go the maintopsail half yards and mainsheet, and the men were in the act of doing this whn ordered down. That was done for fear the masts would give way and the men be sent into the sea. There were two cutters– port and starboard. It takes 13 men to man one, and 11 the other. There would have been a life-belt for each man on board each cutter That was the regulation ; but the cutters were bottom up ward, and I could not say whether the belts were there or not. I know three life-belts have been picked up. It was a sudden gust which sent the ship over. It came without giving any warning. As one of the ship's company, I did not expect that any such thing would take place.

Capt George Henry Ferrier, of the 105th Light Infantry, stationed at Colchester, identified one of the bodies seen by the Coroner and Jury as that of his late brother, Capt. Louis George Ferrier, of the Royal Engineers, stationed at Bermuda, who was taking passage home on leave in the Eurydice. he had no idea that his brother was coming home in the ship until the previous afternoon, when he received a telegram. The deceased was in the 38th year of age.

Sydney Fletcher stated that he was just turned 19 years of age and was a first-class ordinary seaman on board the Eurydice. He came in the Eurydice from Bermuda. He had only been in her during the last trip. He had been on board during the past six mouths. On Sunday afternoon last he was below from 12 o'clock at noon till 4 o'clock. At the latter hour he was getting his tea, in order to be in readiness to go on watch at eight bells, when he heard a rush of water coming through the port. Just before he found the water come in, the ship had given a lurch. He lowered the half port, and then ran on deck and let go the topsail halyard. At that time the water was coming in over her lee nettings. He assisted another man in overhauling the fore top-sail halyards. He then got over the weather nettings and walked right aft on the side of thn ship. She was right on her side at that time. He walked below her ports. When he got aft of the quarter he could see the keel of the ship out of water. It was blowing hard and snowing at the time. The sea was breaking over her and the main yard was touching the water. He saw the Captain standing on the quarter-deck giving orders to clear the cutter. The foremost gripe was cut, but the after one could not be cut, as it was too late, the ship at this time sinking fast. He picked up a life belt that had fallen out of one of the cutters, about 30 yards away from the ship. He could not see much of the ship at that time, as she was very nearly under water. Mr. Edmunds, a Sub-Lieutenant. took off his coat and jumped overboard, but witness could not tell what became of him afterwards. He saw Mr. Tabor standing with his coat off and no cap on. He afterwards saw him clinging to a wash deck locker. He did not see anything at all of Capt. Ferrier during the afternoon, but he understood that he was picked up from off the wash deck locker. He saw Bennett, the captain of the quarter-deck, and Mr. Brewer, the warrant officer, floating past him. He thought he must have been in tne water an hour and twent minutes when he was picked up by the schooner. He (witness) was sensible when he was picked up. Before he found the ship lurch he did not know that the wind was blowing any harder than before. He did not believe there were any more than two others beside himself wno succeeded in getting on the upper deck. They were all crying out and screaming. He was close to the hatchway when the lurch came, and that was how he came to get up on to the upper deck. After ihe ship went down, he saw Mr Brewer floating about, and asked him in what direction he thought the land was. He could not say how long the snow continued to fall but when it cleared away he saw the land, and thought he was about half-a-mile from it. He did not see any other men floating about. When the snow cleared away he saw the schooner standing towards him as he was making for the shore.

By the Foreman : I did not see the ship go down.

A Juror: Were there any men below in irons? — I believe there was one.

By the Coroner : I cannot say whether the wind was bowing off the land or not. I had no reason for noticing.

A Juror: Had you a sufficient quantity of ballast on board?— A great portion of our ballast was water.

The Coroner : Which was being consumed during the voyage ? — Yes 

Do you kuow whether there waa a large quantity of water in her on Sunday afternoon before this happened ?— No, I cannot tell.

The Foreman : You had not been put on shor allowance of water ?— No. 

The Coroner: Were the guns or stores displaced previously ? —No ; not that I kuow of.

Mr. R. R Tabor: Don't you think you might have been mistaken in recognising my brother ? You say he was in his shirt sleeves when you saw him, and yet when he was picked up he had on his uniform coat. — I might have beeu mistaken.

By Mr. Harvey : I had not much opportunity of seeing what was going on after I came up, but I heard the Captain giviug his orders. Up to the very minute of the lurch and the rush of warer the weather had been fine.

Mr. Harvey : Do you really know whether the water formed a part of the ballast ? — I know that we had water on board, and I always understood that it was partly carried as ballast. I have been told on board that her ballast was partly water. I do not know of my own knowledge that we had any concrete and iron on board as ballast.

Do you realy know anything of your own knowledge as to her ballast ? No, except that I have always heard chat her ballast was partl water.

You were below at the time of ihe lurch ? — Yes.

And you cannot say what orders were given on deck until you came up ?— No.

The Coroner : I will re-call the witness Cuddiford and ask him a few questions as to the ballast. He will know more than ihis witness.

The witness Cuddiford was re-called and questioned by one of the jurors, Mr. Henry Owen.

What ballast had the Eurydice on board at the time of the accideut ? — She had her proper ballast for the tonnage of the vessel.

What is this about the water being reckoned as ballast ? — She had two tier of tanks, and the lower tier were never touched or disturbe in any way.

Had she sufficient ballast without the water? — She had sufficient ballast in her without reckoning the water or her stores, but when the water or the stores became light, tne vessel, of course, sailed lighter, and became more lively, and when she gave lurches, as she often used to do, she would knock us off our feet to leeward.

She had the reputation of being a lively vessel, had she not ? —No ; I did not know that she had.

the lower tier of tanks being full of water, and never touched, would add to her ballast as a matter ot course? — Yes, of course it would.

At any time during the period you have been on board the Eurydice have you ever heard anything said about her ballast having been shifted or inter- fered with in any way ? — No.

Has it been slutted ? -No. Had it been shifted I must have known it.

Aud had it shifted hands would you have been employed to put it right again ? — Yes.

The Foreman. —You say she was on her side and then righted ? — Yes, but still she went down on her side.

The Coroner.— So that the fact of her righting herself for a short time did not make any difference ? —No; her mizenmast stood out of water as she went down.

Then it was only what may be termed a temporary righting ? - That was all.

Do you kuow what the state of the barometer was just nefore the occurrence— I mean during the day or two before ? —I do not know. Dr. Murdoch used to take the readings of the barometer every morning at 8 o'clock. He took them every day since we have been in commission.

Did you hear of any sudden fall having takeii place in the baromoter ? -No. Had there been any fall when tne barometer was read at 8 o'clock on Sunday morning I must have known of it, for I wasworking close by where Dr. Murdoch took the readings. Every day at 2 o'clock the Navigating Lieutenant used to put up a card on the main deck showing the distance we had run, and the latitude and longitude.

William Langworth Jenkin was called and examined. He said he was master of the schooner, Emma, of Padstow. On Suuday afternoon last he was proceeding from Newcastle to Poole. At about ten minutes past 4 o'clock, according to his watch, he encountered a sudden squall when off Dunnose.

The Coroner : Had you any warning of the squall's approach? -It looked rather bad to windward before it came on.

Did you notice any alteration in your sails in consequence?– Yes. We hauled down the flying jib, the main topmast staysail, and the gaff top-sail. We lowered away at the mainsail the top gallantsail, and looked after the various halyards. We afterwards lowered the foresail down.

What sails hod you then set? We only had the standing jib set properly.

Were you able to do this before the squall came on ? —No ; we did it in the squall.

How long did the squall last ? I suppose half-an-hour. We were from four to five miles from land when the squall struck us.

A Juror : There was no high land to prevent your seeing the approach of a storm ? – Well, sir, we saw it rising up very black to windward when we looked out.

Another Juror: Did you see anything of the Eurydice before she went down ?  – No.

The Coroner : Tell us what happened subsequently to the squall. — There was a lot of snow. and when it cleared away I saw something floating up in the water, and I sent a man up into the rigging to see if he could make out what it was. Another reported that he saw a man in the water. We set a reef mainsail, a fore staysail, and a topsail an went towards what we saw floating to windward off us. As we got nearer we heard cries from the water for help, and when we got up to the spot we found five men floating in the water.

Were they together ? — No. They were about a quarter of a mile apart I should say. We picked them all up. They were very much exhausted and I believe they were all insensible after we got them on deck. Those we picked up were the witnesses Cuddiford aud Fletcher and the bodies of Lieut. Tabor, Capt. Ferrir, and Bennett. We took them into the cabin, stripped them, rubbed them, and then proceeded on for Ventnor. I think it should have been from three or four miles from the land. I picked them up, but I cannot tell you the exact distance. Cuddiford and Fletcher took a little water, but the others could not take any. Aboat came off, and I sent on shore for a doctor. Two doctors came. I do not think all three of the deceased, whose bodies the Coroner and jury have viewed, were quite dead when they were received on board my vessel, but I think Bennett was dead when we picked him up. One of my men said he thought he heard one of them speak after he was got into the boat. Lieut. Tabor was wearing his uniform at the time.

Do you consider that the squall was sufficiently violent to capsize the Eurydice, she being under full sail? No; I should think not. I was surprised when I found the Eurydice had gone down. I thought it was a boat's crew I was pick ag up.

A Juror : What sort of a vessel is yours ? She is a schooner of 137 tons register. We have six hands all told. We were laden with coals and were short of about 10 tons of our full cargo. Wnen the squall struck us the wind was about W.N W. We did not have time to take in our sail before we were struck. We had more time to prepare for the squall than the Eurydice had, seeing that we were furiher out to sea, and consequently had more opportunities noticing the approach of a storm. In answer to further questions, the witness said he had no stimulants on board to administer to the persons he picked up, but supposing they had they had they would have been of no use, as the three deceased persons could not have partaken of them. After they had picked up the bodies they looked about, but could see no others. Three of the five were wearing swimmming belts; one was wearing a life-buoy, and another was clinging to a box. Witness had been 15 years at sea, and had known squalls stronger than this, but conld not say that he know them to come on more suddenly. He had n ver heard that the Dunnose had a reputation for sudden gusts of wind.

Dr James Mann Williamson deposed to going on board the schooner on Sunday afternoon, and, in conjunction with Dr. Morton, using every possible means for restoring the deceased. He attributed the death of the deceased to drowning.

George Parkinson, seaman on board thn Emma, deposed to seeing the Eurydice going up Chauuel as they were going down. All sail was n the Eurydice as far as he could see, but he did did think that she had too much on her when he saw her. He saw the squall coming, which was very sudden, however. There was only a moderate breeze when he saw her, and she was then about a mile from the shore, while they in the schooner were four or five miles away. They did not lower sails until the squall came. He had been in squalls far heavier than that, and was surprised when he heard that the Eurydice had not weathered it out.

By Mr Harvey. — He had known cases in which a squall had seriously injured one vessel, and had not affected, in the slightest degree, another, although close to it.

Police Sergeant Ransom, stationed at Ventnor, produced a gold watch which he found on the body of Capt. Ferrier, and it was found to have stopped at eight minutes to 4.

John Flynn, a commissioned boatman in the Coastguard service, was called by Mr. Harvey, and produced two photographs, showing the effects of a tornado which had visited the Island two years ago, by which the Globe Hotel was destroyed, while the house next door escaped injury. The photographs also showed the effects upon trees in the vicinity. The witness added that he had known cases, and particularly in the China seas, in whicn squalls nad capsized one junk and left the other totally uninjured.

This being all the evidence, the coroner proceeded to sum up. He said the first question for the jury was as to what the capsizing of the Eurydice was owing; whether it was due to her carrying too much sail, and, if not, whether there was sufficient promptitude on the part of the captaiu in lowering sails when he saw the storm upon him. The evidence went to show that there was not too nmch sail, aud that all possible promptitude had been used. As to whether the capsizing might have been owing to want of sufficient ballast, Cuddiford had proved that the ship had her proper ballast.

The jury then retired, and, after an absence of half-an-hour, returned with the following verdict:

"The jury unanimously find that the three deceased were accidentally drowned, owing to the capsizing of Her Majesty's ship Eurydice by a sudden squall, at Dunnose, on Suuday, the 24th inst., and the jury consider that from the evidence adduced no lame whatever can attach to the captain, officers, and men of the ship."

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003187/18780329/051/0006

Evening Mail
Friday 29 March 1878

p6

THE LOSS OF THE EURYDICE.

A meeting of naval officers and influential inhabitants of Portsmouth was held on Wednesday at the College in the Dockyard for the purpose of organizing a Eurydice Relief Committee. The sad occasion drew together a number of gentlemen who were formerly associated for the relief of the sufferers by the Thunderer explosion and whose offer of services for a similar purpose were heartily welcomed. Among the gentlemen present were Admiral Fanshawe, Rear-Admiral Foley, Admiral Raby, Captains Wilson, Herbert, Singer, Arthur, Kelly, Peile, and Henderson, the Mayor and ex-Mayor of Portsmouth,the Vicar of Portsmouth, Colonel Burnaby,Colonel Richards, Inspector-General Domville, Canon Doyle, Commanders Otley, Wilson, and Swinson, and Mr. Griffin, J.P. The chair was taken by Admiral Fanshawe, Commander-in-Chief.

The Chairman said he did not think it necessary to make many remarks in introducing the business of the meeeting, as absolutely all that was known with respect to the calamity which had befallen the *Eurydice* had been published in the pablic prints. They had met to give practical effect to the sympathy they felt for the famiies and relatives of the sufferers in their great distress.

Captain WILSON said that on Monday evening himself and a few other officers met together and formed a provisional committee. The names of these gentlemen were telegraphed up to Lord Charles Beresford, the commander of the Thunder, and were published in the *Mail*. By means of this provisional committee they were enabled to give the matter a start. The names of the committee were the Commander-in-Chief, Admral Foley, Captain Herbert, Captain Jones, Mr. Wise, Mr. Richards and himself. Invitations were then issued to all the ships and clubs, and one was sent to the Generals commanding, and notices were given in all the newspapers. The objects of the meeting were to take into connsideration the best mode of raising a relief fund, and, moreover to relieve the provisional committee of any further responsibility. The cashier and seeretary who had manage the affairs of the Thunderer's fund so ably came forward and aided the cdturuittee in this preliminary work, and Mr. Richarda was now acting as hon. treaseurer and Mr. Wise as hon. secretary. As the latter would have to work morning and night to carry on the business, they could not expect him to perform his duties quite gratuitously. After describing the progress of the business, Captain Wilson said the provisional committee had received subscriptions which had been placeg in the hands of the treasurer to the amount of—speaking roughly—about £270, which included a donation from the Commander-in-Chief of £25. They had been promised altogether about £390 more, which included £50 from the First Lord of Admiralty, £25 from Sir Massey Lopes, and £25 from Hon. Mr. Egerton. In addition to this they had already received about £11O from subscriptions on board the Thunderer, and from other ships £200 had been received, the *Exellent* giving the sum of £155. Thus there had been raised the large sum of £850 which, considering that hardly 72 hours had elapsed since the unfortunate catastophe had occurred, must be regarded as very handsome and satisfactory, and very much larger than had been raised when the meeting assembled there some ten days after the accident on board the Thunderer occurred. The services of Mr. Wise and of Mr. Richards had been secured, and the committee had the advantage of their great knowledge in the management of these matters. In the case of the Thunderer they were not able to strike the iron while it was hot, and in consequence a great deal of money that might have been obtained was lost. But now the gentlemen mentioned had taken this thing in hand, they knew how to pull all the wires; and, no doubt, if the meeting gave them authority they would within 48 hours have circulars and appeals all over England, and all the machinery at work for obtaining a satisfactory result. As far was at present known, there were but three officers and 28 men of the Eurydice who had wives and families, and there were 69 men who were the support of relatives, mothers or sisters. But, of course, that could not represent all the married petty officers and men. It was quite probable that a large number of thrm did not "allot" to their wives, and hence the committee had not yet received information as to all the cases. There were a captain of the Royal Engineers and six sappers and miners, and as these were all time expired, they were probably married. There was also a sergeant of Marines and 12 men from Bermuda, a large number of whom married. That was all he could tell the meeting.

The first resolution, which was moved by the CHAIRMAN and seconded by Captain Arthur was as follows:—

"The appalling accident to Her Majesty's ship Eurydice, whereby numerous families are rendered comparatively destitute through loss of the bread-winner, calls for the sympathy of all who hold that England should ever maintain her supremacy on the ocean, and this meeting pledges itself to use every endeavour to alleviate, as far as possible, the grievous loss sustained by the widows, orphans and relatives of those who, within sight of their homes, perished in the execution of their duty to their country."

Admiral Foley moved and Mr. James Griffin seconded:—

"That a certain number of gentlemen be elected to form a standing committee with power to add to their number, and to select a sub or managing committee."

This having been carried, a pwerful committee was formed consisting of the Admirals, Caaptain Wilson, the Mayor, and the principal gentelment present, together with Lord Charles Beresford, Mr. Sebastian Gassiot and others who were not abale to attend.

On the motion of Captain Kelly, seconded by Staff Commander Braddon, Mr. Richards, of the Dockyard, and Mr. Wise, both of whom belonged to the Thunderer Relief Fund Committee, were appointed treasurer and secretary, and the National and Provincial Bank, Portsea, was selected as the banker of the fund.

Mr. Pink, the ex-Mayor of Portsmouth, moved that a deputation wait upn the Lord Mayor of London and the City Companies to ask their assistance and co-operation. The resolution was seconded by the Vicar of Portsmouth, who, as a civilian, was anxious to state that the loss of the Eurydice was felt as much by the general public as by the Navy itself.

Inspector-General Domville moved, and Mr, Penfold, R.N., seconded, that the clergy and ministers of all denominations and the various clubs be appealed to for subscriptions; it was also agreed, on the motion of Commander Otely, seconded by Lieutenant Ackland, that circular letters be sent to all Her Majesty's ships, marine divisions, regiment dockyards, and naval hospitals.

A vote of thanks having been accorded to Admiral Fanshawe for presiding, on the motion of the Mayorof Portsmouth and Liietenant-Colonel Galt, the proceedings terminated. In addition to the sums mentioned by Captain Wilson, over £30 was subscribed in the room, and in proof of the interest which is taken in the charitable movement by the seamen of the port, it may be stated that the sum contributed by the crew of the Thunderer amounts to an average of 4s. per man. A meeting of the general committee is appointed to meet at this dockyard this afternoon.

Although the Coroner's jury has agreed in finding a verdict exonerating the captain, officers, and crew of the Eurydice from any culpability as regards the loss of the ship, it has been noticed that they expressly do so from the evidence that was adduced before them, and as this consisted necessarily of the statements of the able seaman Cuddiford, and the ordinary seamen Fletcher, a mere lad, who was below at the time the ship was struck, it is thought that further investigation into the circumstances of the wreck is called for. A Naval Court of Inquiry will be held on board the Duke of Wellington, at Portsmouth, under the presidency of Admiral Fanshawe and Admiral Hall. The Secretary of the Admiralty has already visited the port for the purpose of making the necessary arrangements. The great difficulty is to account for Captain Hare crowding his vessel with canvas at a time when the falling of the barometer showed that bad weather was at hand, and after other ships had shortened sail. There has been no rumours of panic, but it is thought that the efforts of the officers at the supreme moment of being struck may have been partly arrested by the fact that the ship was manned by ordinary seamen who were comparatively inexperienced. It is also regarded as unusual that a ship with all ger canvas spread and cutting through the water at about nine knots should have had her lee ports open. Had the ports been closed, or had they been closed as soon as the squall was noticed, it is thought that the ship would have righted herself after being struck, even had there been no time to lower the balliards and shorten sail. The body of Lieutenant Tabor, the IFrst Lietenant, was conveyed to the relatives of the deceased at Cheam by the last train on Tuesday night, and yesterday the body of Captain Ferrier was removed to Edinburgh for interment, the men-of-war in harbour lowering their ensigns sa it was brought on shore. It is known that no bodies are on the weather deck, and it is not believed that many of the bodies of the port watch will be recovered as they would most probably be carried out to sea with the ebb tide, assisted by the wind. It is, however, thought that the starboard watch will all be found between decks. One hundred and twenty coffins have been ordered to be forwarded to Haslar Hospital in readiness for the reception of the bodies. 

The riggers and divers went out again on Wednesday, to the wreck, but the weather was too boisterous to enable them to get near. The weather having moderated, they went out again in the afternoon, and succeeded in getting of the fore royal and letting go her fore tack and sheet. They very nearly succeeded in clearing the foresail, but as the tide was coming up strong, they were obliged to desist for the night. Only the fore, main and mizen yards remain and when these, the slack rops, and the anchor gear have been cleared, the ship will be ready for slinging. Until the yards are removed itis dangerous for the divers to go between decks, and it is doubtful whether the bodies will be reached until the ship is afloat.

Nothing further has occurred with reference to the Eurydice. The tugs went out of Portsmouth harbour yesterday meorning to continue operations on the wreck, but when they reached Southsea pier they encountered so heavy a sea that it was deemed useless to proceed further, and they returned to harbour. The Pearl, corvette and the Rinaldo, sloop, which latter was formerly prepared to lift the Oberon off the shoal at the mouth of Portsmouth harbour, are being fitted to assist in lifting the Eurydice and floating her in Sandown bay. A number of purchases will be required, and a couple of weeks will probably elapse before operations will be commenced. A light ship has been moored near the wreck.

Orders have been given by the Admiralty for the widows of the petty officers and seamen to be paid a sum of money equaly to one year's pay of their deceased husbands. This is the customary dole.

The Lord Mayor has intimated to the naval authorities at Portsmouth his willingness to receive subscriptions at the Mission House in aid of the fund now being raised for the relief of the widows, orphans, and dependent relatives of the men lost.

Lieutenant-General Price Edward of Saxe-Weimar, the Duke of Tesk, and Admiral Sir Spencer Robinson, K.C.B. have joined the Eurydice Fund Ciommittee, of which Lord Henry Lennox is hon. secretary.

"Visitor" writes to us from Mitcham:

"On Sunday last I was walking with my son from Epsom Downs to Dorking via Headley Common, one of the most exposed pieces of table land in Surrey. About a quarter past 4 we observed an enormous black cloud like a monster balloon. It seemed to burst in a moment and for two minutes at least here was a regular tornado, which very nearly knocked us down. THe sno which followed lasted about three quarters of an hour, and on reaching a roadside inn we found that what appeared to be snow on our clothes was hard-frozen ice."

TO THE EDITOR

Sir, in the accounts which have appeared of the loss of the Eurydice and in the articles of which this sad catastrophe has furnished the text, I have seen no remark made on the conincidence that a somewhat similar fate, under somewhat similar circumstances,— for it was almost within sight of her destination — befell her ill-fated consort ship 15 years ago. COnsort ship I say, for the ship alluded to is the Orpheus. The loss of the Orpheus, as it happened on the other side of the world, has perhaps been forgotten here. Her Majesty's ship Orpheus, carrying the pendant of the Commodore of the Australia station, was entering the Manukau harbout, near Auckland, on her voyage to New Zealand. It was a fine Saturday afternoon in February or March, 1863. Mistaking the channel she struck on the bar; Commodore, officers and men took the the rigging, but were swept awy by the surf, the paymaster, two mid-dhipmen, and some 40 men being the only ones saved out of a large ship's company. I am speaking from memory only, but I saw the survivors brought on shore, and this, I think, was the number. The conincidence that two ships so connected by their names should be lost when their wished for havens were all but reached seems worthy of remark.  
I am your obedient servant,  
H. Stratton Bates.  
The Cranhams, Cirencester, March 25.  



TH: letter noteable eg for Eurydice myth, but also is:

> "The appalling accident to Her Majesty's ship Eurydice, whereby numerous families are rendered comparatively destitute through loss of the bread-winner, calls for the sympathy of all who hold that England should ever maintain her supremacy on the ocean, and this meeting pledges itself to use every endeavour to alleviate, as far as possible, the grievous loss sustained by the widows, orphans and relatives of those who, within sight of their homes, perished in the execution of their duty to their country."


---



https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000344/18780330/007/0002
Morpeth Herald
Saturday 30 March 1878
p2-2

CAPSIZING OF THE EURYDICE. LIVES LOST

We regret to have to record that during the sudden and severe snowstorm which occurred Sunday afternoon her Majesty's ship Eurydice, Admiralty training ship for second-class seamen, capsized off Dunnose, a headland near the the south east coast of the Isle of Wight. A schooner picked up five of the crew, but three of then died subsequently, one of them being Tabor, the first lieutenant, who was brought ashore at Ventnor. The only survivors are Benjamin Cuddiford, of Plymouth, and Sydney Fletcher, of Bristol, first-class boy, aged 19. These two men are well provided for at the Cottage Hospital, Bonchurch. The Eurydice was commissioned in Portsmouth 1877, and sent to the Barbados station.

Ventnor, Monday Night.

There is now no doubt that during the sudden squall which passed over the British Isles on Sunday afternoon one of the most terrible disasters that has ever befallen the English navy occurred off the Isle of Wight, resulting in the almost immediate foundering of a well-found man-of-war, and the drowning of 328 souls of 330 who were on board her. The Eurydice, though an old fashioned wooden frigate, has gone to the bottom precisely the same way as the newly designed turret ship Captain did, that is:– She has been capsized owing to the press of canvas she was carrying, when suddenly struck by a squall, and sad to relate, the number who have perished with her is not far short of the total lost off the coast of Spain in Sept., 187O. The Eurydice was an old 26-gun sailing frigate, and in her day was regarded as a crack vessel. She had been laying up at Portsmouth for years until 1876 the Admiralty, at the suggestion of the late Mr, Ward Hunt, determined to utilise her as a seagoing training ship for ordinary seamen. This course, gave very general satisfaction to the service, it being felt that some more extended knowledge of working a big ship at sea was needed for our young sailors than they could possibly obtain by cruising about the Channel in the summer in the five, brigs hitherto employed for that purpose. Accordingly in February, 1877, the Eurydice was commissioned Portsmouth by Captain Marcus A. S. Hare, having a complement of 280 hands, by far the larger proportion being ordinary seamen of the second-class. For this she cruised about the Channel. Captain Hare fulfilling his special duty of instruction in the most satisfactory manner, and justifying his selection for such command by his special knowledge of sailing a ship. This was especially illustrated last summer, when he brought his vessel under sail from Plymouth Sound right into the Hamoaze, a feat which to that time had not been attempted for many years. At the commencement of the last winter, the Admiralty ordered the Eurydice to proceed on a winter cruise to the West Indies, and she did so, being accompanied by two brigs, also manned by ordinary seamen. She was returning from that cruise on Sunday, and was within an hour's sail of Spithead, when the terrible catastrophe chronicled below befel her. The Eurydice left Bermuda on the 6th inst., having on board, in addition to her own crew, some time-expired men both from the army and navy, and some prisoners, bringing the total number on board to 330. She had a very fair passage all the way home, passing the Lizard on Sunday morning, and being off the Isle of Wight soon after three the afternoon of that day. At that time the wind was light and the sea smooth, although at noon there had been a fresh breeze blowing. The ship had all plain sails set, with studding sails on the port side; the wind from the southwest, and being on the port quarter. Thus it will be seen that she was under a heavy press of canvas, though those who saw her say that it was not too much, considering the force of the wind that time.

THE MOMENT OF THE DISASTER.

From what could be gathered this morning from the two survivors, prior to their being despatched to Portsmouth to see the Commanderin-in-Chief, it seems that, 3.30 p.m., they, in common with many their comrades, were on the lower deck having tea. About quarter to four, Cuddiford says he heard the boatswain's mate pipe hands to shorten sail, and he and others at once proceeded on deck to execute the order. On getting up the ladder, however, he found that the ship had been struck by a tremendous squall, which had first come from the north-west, and that she was heeling over very fast on the starboard side. Captain Hare was the bridge giving instructions for shortening the sail, but this was never actually done, as the men on deck, seeing that the ship was rapidly turning over, proceeded to jump from her side into the sea. Cuddiford and Fletcher, the two survivors, both did this, and they attribute their being rescued alive to their knowledge of swimming. Cuddiford says that three or four minutes elapsed between the pipe to shorten sail and the ship going down, and an indication of the time of the vessel foundering is given by the watch found on the body of Captain Ferrier, R.E., which stopped precisely at eight minutes four.

FIRST TIDINGS OF THE CATASTROPHE.

The first tidings of the disaster were communicated to the shore the captain of the schooner Emma, of Padstow. He anchored his vessel off the coastguard station at Ventnor, and hoisted a signal of distress, upon which the inspecting officer of coastguards, Commander Roche, and the chief officer proceeded to her a boat. On learning the true nature of things, Commander Roche despatched some of his men for medical assistance, and, with others, tried to restore animation to the five persons who had been rescued. Two surgeons of Ventnor were very soon in attendance, but all efforts to restore life failed, except in the case of Cuddiford and Fletcher, who, when they could be removed, were taken on shore and treated the Cottage Hospital. The bodies were removed to the shore, and placed in shed near the Esplanade.

NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTAIN OF THE EMMA.

The captain of the schooner Emma afforded the following information:– He stated that he was on voyage from Padstow to Poole in ballast, and that he was proceeding up Channel on Sunday afternoon, when he observed the Eurydice with all sail set. She was much nearer the land than his vessel. He observed that the wind was shifting about and the weather looking threatening, consequently he shortened sail. The squall was accompanied by a very heavy fall of snow, and when this had cleared away be looked around and could see no signs of tho Eurydice. He continued on his course when suddenly he heard someone shouting for assistance. He once lowered a boat, which succeeded in picking five persons and bringing them on board the schooner. He cruised about the spot for some time, but being unable to observe any one else, he then stood in for the shore. The five persons rescued by the Emma proved Benjamin Cuddiford, able seaman, of the Eurydice, whose home is at Plymouth; Sydney Fletcher, ordinary seaman, of the Rover, who was taking passage in the Eurydice, and who resides Bristol; Lieutenant Francis Hope Tabor, First Lieutenant of the Eurydice, who resided at Cheam, Surrey; Captain Terrier, R.E., who was taking passage in the Eurydice; and petty officer, named Bennett, late of the Rover, who was also taking passage. It is known that Bennett was married man, but neither of the rescued men have any idea where his wife resides. The captain of the schooner believes that Lieut. Tabor, Captain Ferrier, and Bennett were dead when they were pioked up, and in this view the medical men concurred.

DISTRESSING SCENE

A heardrending scene occurred this afternoon when Mrs. Tabor, who had been married to the deceased officer but 15 months arrived in town, and proceeded to identify the body of her husband. Her grief was terrible to behold, so great, indeed, that the men who had charge of the house where the remains lay, felt themselves unable to remain in the place, leaving the unfortunate lady alone with the dead.

THE SURVIVORS INTERVIEWED.  
[CENTRAL NEWS TELEGRAM. |

Portsmouth, Monday Night.  
With reference to the wreck the Eurydice, matters remain much about the same as this, morning. This afternoon, the two survivors were by special orders brought to Admiral Tenchore at Portsmouth, by whom they were interviewed , privately for the information of the Admiralty. Subsequently they were seen by the Central News Portsmouth, correspondent, to whom the following information was detailed:— Ben. Cuddiford, 35, single, said: I was able seaman on board the Eurydice. I was on the port watch Sunday afternoon. I went on deck at noonday. There were then one hundred and fifty men deck in the watch. We were to come off watch at four o'clock. We were under full sail, making for Spithead. We set the lowest studsail just before two o'olock, and took it in again about quarter to four, just when the gale and snow storm came upon us. We had taken in the lower studsails and were about to take in the upper sails, the men being aloft, when the ship gave a lurch, and the captain ordered the men to come down, as the ship was listing over to starboard, and the water was coming over the lee bulwarks. I cannot say whether they had got down when the ship turned over. I was the weather side, letting go the ropes to let the sails ease off. After the first turn over she righted a bit, some few feet, and then went down bow first. As she sank, she gradually turned over, and I and number of men got on to the bottom near the keel. The captain was also on the bottom and remained fast. I and some other men jumped astern of the sinking ship, which remained on her side for about five minutes and then went down bow first. I and another seaman, who was afterwards drowned, tried to cut away the cutter on the port side of the ship as she was sinking. We had got one of the grips undone when the vessel went down, and we were obliged leave it. I picked up a lifebuoy, and having fastened to myself struck out away from the ship. As the vessel sank the suction carried down a number of people. I passed the two surgeons, but could not render them any assistance. One of them, Mr. Murdock, was has shirt sleeves, but they were too much exhausted to cry out. The wind was just abaft the beam on the port tack. There were four guns on board, but all were well secured. The ports, however, were opened. Captain Hare was very fond of the ship, and all the crew had great faith in her. The captain was on deck in charge of the watch, and was giving orders just before we were struck by the gale. We were going about eight and a half knots, and there was no sign of a squall. About ten minutes to four were turned on dock to lower studsails and to get in upper sails. As I have before stated, when the captain ordered us down from aloft I did not hear anything carried away, and cannot say Whether any of the masts went by the board. There were about 150 men on deck altogether in the watch.

SCENES THE WATER.

I saw one of the officers, Mr. Murdock, swimming in the water. I also saw the boatswain, Mr. Brewer, swimming about. He was much exhausted, and his eyes appeared to be starting out of his head. I was in water about one hour and twenty minutes. I did not seem to feel the cold until I stepped on to the deck of the schooner that rescued us, and then I appeared to lose consciousness. The seaman named Bennett, captain of the quarter-deck, was the man who tried to get away the cutter with me. Poor fellow, he was drowned. His wife saw him off at Portsmouth. Lieut. Tabor and Captain Ferrier, of the Royal Engineers, were also in the water with us, but both died after getting on board the schooner that rescued us. We were very kindly treated on board the Emma. I saw several men pass me in the water, and two surgeons, but they were too exhausted to speak.

IN THE GRASP OF DEATH.

Sydney Fletcher, 19, single, belonging to Bristol, corroborated the narrative of Cuddiford, and added that, on jumping off the wreck, a number of men attempted to seize them in the endeavour to be saved. They had, however, most reluctantly to push them off. One poor fellow seized Fletcher's cork waistcoat, and in order to save himself he had to thrust the unfortunate man away, and he sank to rise no more. The cries of the drowning were most piteous to listen to.

THE CAPTAIN FIRM AT HIS POST.

The last time the survivors saw the captain, was when he was standing firm to his post on the sinking vessel. As she disappeared beneath the waves, dozens of poor fellows were dragged down by the vortex caused by the sinking vessel. Having made their depositions to the Admiral, at Portsmouth, the two survivors returned to the Isle Wight, in the charge of Dr. Wells, of , Ventnor. The two men were eagerly questioned by many relatives of those who had gone down in the Eurydice, and the effect upon them, caused by the hopeless answers of the survivors, was most distressing to witness.

LIST OF THE SHIP'S OFFICERS.

Ventnor, Moday Night.

The wreck is lying directly in the course of vessels going up and down Channel, and efforts are now being made to remove the masts, sails, and rigging, for which purpose riggers, shipwrights, and divers from Portsmouth dockyard are employed.

The officers of the Eurydice included the following: —Captain Marcus A. S. Hare, Lieut. Francis H. Tabor, Lieut. Charles V. Strange, Lieut. J. E. Black, Lieut. Stanley, A. B. Burney, staff surgeon; Jas. L. Whitney, paymaster; Frank Pitman, sub-lieutenant; Hon. Edward B. Gifferd, sub-lieutenant; Herbert S. Edmunds, sub-lieutenant; Walter S. Smith, sub-lieutenant; Sidney G. Randolph, surgeon; Robt. Murdock, M.B., gunner; Fredk. Allen, boatswain; Wm. Brewer, boatswain; Joseph Warren, assistant-clerk; Wm. Lamont, sub-lieutenant. The Hon. Edward Robert Gifford was brother and heir-presumptive to Lord Gifford, who served with distinction in the Ashantee expedition. The bodies of Captain Terrier and of Mr. Bennett, petty officer, were identified by the survivors.

THE INQUEST AND VERDICT.

On Tuesday afternoon, the Coroner for the Isle of Wight, Mr. Frederick Blake, opened an inquest on the bodies Francis Hope Tabor, late first-lieutenant of the Eurydice, Captain L.ouis John George Ferrier, R.E., and Bennett, a petty officer, which had been landed from the schooner Emma by the crew of which vessel they had been picked up, along with the two survivors. The jury consisted of 13 gentlemen residing Ventnor.

Mr. R. Montagu Tabor said he lived Carshalton, Surrey. He had seen the body which had been viewed the jury, and he identified it as his brother, Lieut. Tabor. He last saw him alive about five or six months ago. He had since been to the West Indies in the Eurydice, and was on his way home her when the catastrophe occurred. Deceased would have been 30 years of age in July next.

Benjamin Cuddiford said; I am an A.8., and reside at Millbay, Plymouth. I have seen the bodies of three deceased, and I am able to identity them. They are Lieut. Tabor, a man named Bennett, I do not know his Christian name, and a Captain of R.E., who was taking passage in the ship. Lieut. Tabor was first lieutenant on the Eurydice, and I was A. B. on board her. Bennett was captain of the quarter deck. She was a wooden sailing ship of four guns, She has been employed as a training ship, having been thirteen months on commission. During the winter she has been all round the West India Islands. Her captain was Captain Marcus Hare. We left Bermuda on our homeward voyage on the 6th March, being bound for Portsmouth. I should think, but I am not certain, that we had over 300 officers and men on board, including supernumeraries. There were about 30 men belonging the ship's company and the rest were ordinary seamen, who, at the conclusion of a training, leave the ship. On Sunday last, just before two o'clock, we were turned on deck to set the lower studding soil. The ship was then off the Isle of Wight. All plain sail had been set before this. All was set except the topgallant studding sails, and they were unbent. The weather at that time was very fine, the wind, which was blowing a moderate breeze, being just abaft the beam. Between 3.30 and 4 o'clock the port watch was called to take in the lower studding sail. We had not then encountered a squall, but it was looking dirty. Captain Hare gave the order, saying " Watch in, lower studding sail." It was then coming on to blow hard. This sail was taken in, and Captain Hare then gave orders to the royal yacht men go aloft and take the royals. They were not taken in as the squall then struck us, and Capt. Hare ordered the men from aloft for their safety. The royals were, I believe, lowered at beat time, but not furled. The captain gave orders as the squall caught to let go the maintopsail halfyards and the mainsheet. That was done, as I saw the gunner's mate let them go. The ship was thence on her beam ends, the men on the lee side being up to their waists in water. I heard the captain say to som one forward—"If you can't let go, cut it". I expect the captain was referring to the foresheet, but can't say. I then climbed up and got on the weather netting, and crawled on to the ship's side, as she was turning over. I did this to get on the weather side of the ship. I could see her keel and her sails were in the water. She righted a few feet, and I saw her mizen topsail out of the water. Then I looked forward and saw the ship sinking from forward, taking down a body of men with her. The water then began to increase aft, and just as it got in ine with the mainmast she turned over, and the boats turned bottom over. The ship's keel was then out of the water. I stuck to the ship, and the captain gave me orders to try and get the cutter clear by cutting the gripes. I cut the forward gripe, and then the water encroached us. The captain was just behind me on the side of the ship. The man who was helping me cut the gripe. He was named Richards, and was washed away, he being, I think, numbed with the cold. I saw the two doctors jump overboard, and I soon after did the same. I passed the two doctors drowning, but could not render them any assistance. I observed many others m the water. I swam round and got a life buoy, and then went to the assistance of others, giving them pieces of wood and spars. I had on lifebuoy. The ship must have gone down just as I jumped off. The captain was still on her side, and he went down on her. I saw six men on the bottom of a boat called the copper punt. I spoke to them. They asked me if there was any hope, and I told them to keep their spirits up. They were washed off the bottom of the punt one by one. I saw one let go owing to the cold. One of the men clinging to the boat was called Mason, another Martin. There was a cook's mate who was taking passage home, he having been left behind by the Tamar. The other three men were ordinary seamen. I saw one other person, Mr. Brewer, the boatswain, with a lifebuoy. As the squall came on I turned my back to it. When the mist cleared away I saw Fletcher near me. I made for the shore, and he did the same. We were swimming about for an hour and 20 minutes, when we were picked up by the schooner. When I got to my feet on the schooner I felt giddy. I was sensible when they picked me up, as I got hold of a rope which they flung to me.

By the Jury: came to blow between 3 and 3.30. We had afterwards a tremendous squall, which must have been the cause of the capsizing of the vessel. A snowstorm came on, and we could not see the land. There was an attempt to bring her up to the wind, there being five men at the wheel, and the Hon. Mr. Gifford, sub-lieutenant, went to assist them. An attempt was made to put the helm up after we could not take in the royals. I cannot say if the helm was put up or not. When the ship was on even keel, the ports were four or five feet above water. The guns were well secured on board, and were not shifted at all. There was one watch, which might number 150, below at the time the order was given to shorten sail. They were writing and sleeping. The captain gave orders to shorten sail as soon as he saw the squall coming quick.

The Coroner: Who was the officer of the watch at the time?— Witness: I recollect now, which I didn't yesterday, that Sub-Lieutenant Randolph was the officer of the watch. He was forward, helping to shorten sail when the squall came on. The ship went down five minutes after she first got on her beam ends. When she first heeled, the starboard quarter boats were filled and carried away. The galley was smashed, and it was impossible to lower any of the boats. The captain was on deck just before the squall came on. There was a life buoy on each side of the bridge, and one on each bow of the launch forward, and one astern— five, in all, on deck. There were about twelve lifebelts in one of the launches, as they had been in use the day before, when the men were over the side painting.

By Mr. Harvey: Directly the captain saw the squall commg, he ordered the reduction of sail, and the largest one in the ship was taken in at once, that being the lower studding sail. The men were lowering the royals when the captain, seeing the squall coming on, shouted them down, and added—"Let go-the main topsail halyards and the main sheet." The captain ordered the men down for fear the topgallant mast and royal mast would be carried away with the men on it.

Mr. Harvey: As an able seaman do you think there was any fault in seamanship to account for the loss of this vessel?— Witness: No, sir. The captain was a thorough seaman, and so were all the officers. I have been in the service nearly 21 years, and I have never seen a squall come so suddenly before.

Captain George Henry Ferrier, of the 105th regiment, now quartered Colchester, identified the body of his brother, Captain Louis John George Ferrier, R.E., who was quartered at Bermuda. He was, witness surmised, coming home on leave, and probably the captain of the Eurydice gave him a passage. Deceased was in his 38th year.

Sydney Fletcher, aged 19, said: I was first-class orderly seaman on board the Eurydice. It was my watch below last Sunday from noon to four p.m. was getting my tea to come on watch at that time, when I heard a rush of water coming in through the ports which are on the main deck. Immediately before that she had given a rather strong lurch. I lowered the after port and ran on deck. The water was then coming over the starboard nettings. I assisted in overhauling the foretop sail halyards. I then got over the port netting and walked right aft on the side of the ship. I walked below her ports. She was then on her side and the water nearly amidships. It was blowing hard and snowing at the time, and the sea was breaking over the ship. I saw the captain standing on the side of the ship giving orders to clear away the cutter. I picked a life belt and jumped into the sea. Mr. Edwards, the sub-lieutenant, took off his coat and jumped overboard just as did. I saw Lieutenant Tabor on the side of the ship in his shirt sleeves and without his cap. I also saw him in the water floating on a wash deck locker. I shouted to the schooner and was so full of joy when I saw her I did not know what was doing. I saw Bennett and the boatswain floating me. I did not notice the wind increase before the ship lurched. I do not think more than two men of the starboard watch got on deck besides me. I heard them crying and screaming. I got up as my mess was close to the forward hatchway. I know that we had iron ballast, and that the water and stores acted as ballast as well.

Cuddiford recalled said the Eurydice had the proper ballast for her tonnage, and beyond that there was a lower tier of tanks, full of water, which was never disturbed.

William Langworthy Jenkins said: I am master of the schooner Emma, of Padstow, and on Sunday last I was proceeding from Newcastle to Poole. About 10 minutes past 4 we encountered a sudden squall, while we were off Dunnose. Previously to it coming on it was looking bad to the windward. Therefore I ordered the flying jib to hauled down and also the main top mast staysail and other sails. Afterwards I lowered foresail. Then I only had the standing jib set properly on my ship. We did this during tne squall which lasted half an hour. The Emma was from four to five miles from land when the squall struck her. I saw nothing of the Eurydice before she went down, but after the snowstorm I saw something floating on the water, and it being reported to be a man I steered towards it. I heard cries for help and found five men floating. They were about a quarter of a mile apart from one another. We picked them up and all were exhausted and insensible. We took them in the cabin and stripped them and rubbed them. Cuddiford and Fletcher were able to take some coffee, but the others could not. Medical men came, but three were dead then, Bennett, fact, was dead when he was picked up. I should not have thought the squall was of such force as to capsize such a vessel as the Eurydice, even when under full sail.

Dr. Winson proved having tried to restore animation to the deceased, but failed to do so. He believed death resulted from drowning in each case.

Henry Parkinson, able seaman on board the Emma, proved seeing the Eurydice ten minutes before the squall. She had plain sail on her, and it was not, in his opinion, too much, considering the weather, for her to be then carrying. He was surprised to hear of her loss. He had been in a great deal heavier squalls, and he noticed in some cases a vessel dismantled, while another close by had escaped.

Photographs showing the partiality of this squall were put in.

This being all the evidence, and the Jury believing the whole of the facts which could be before them had been proved, the Coroner proceeded to sum up.

VERDICT.

The jury retired, and after an absence of half hour, returned with the following verdict:— "The jury unanimously find that the three deceased were accidentally drowned owing to the capsizing of her Majesty's ship Eurydice, by a sudden squall, at Dunnose, on Sunday, the 24th inst., and the jury consider that, from the evidence adduced, no blame whatever can attach to the captain, officers, and men of the ship."

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0001578/18780330/143/0017?browse=true

Illustrated London News
Saturday 30 March 1878

p17

LOSS OF H.M.S. EURYDICE, WITH THREE HUNDRED MEN

The wreck of the Eurydice, the training-ship for young ordinary seamen, of the Isle of Wight, and almost within sight of Spithead, to which place she was approaching at the end of a pleasant and successful cruise to the West Indies, is a disaster which calls to mind the loss of the Captain off Cape Finisterre. With this exception, there is nothing to compare with the calamity which occurred on Sunday afternoon, so far as the Navy is concerned, though the loss of life has frequently been exceeded by the sinking of emigrant-vessels. The circumstances are similar in many respects to those attending the loss of the Captain, both ships having turned over and sunk during a gale of wind, all their sail being at the time set. So far as can be ascertained, the Eurydice had 368 souls on board at the time. But this is very much a matter of conjecture, as, besides her own officers and crew, she was bringing home a number of military officers, supernumeraries, and invalids from the West Indies. Hence considerable uncertainty exists both as to the names and number of the sufferers.

The Eurydice was a wooden, full-rigged sailing ship of 921 tons displacement, and was at one time considered one of the smartest and quickest twenty-six-gun frigates in the service. She was built about 1843. Last year she was converted into a training-ship for ordinary seamen at Mr. John White's yard at Cowes, and was completed for sea at Portsmouth Dockyard. She was commissioned on Feb. 7, 1877, and finally sailed from Portsmouth on Nov. 13 with a crew of about 300 ordinary seamen and the officers. All the officers and crew are lost, with the exception of two seamen.

Captain Marcus Hare had been at one time Commander of the St. Vincent, training-ship at Portsmouth, and was selected for the command from his knowledge and experience of young seamen. Lieutenant Francis Tabor was a thoroughly efficient sailor, haying had command of the Cruiser in the Mediterranean. Among the other officers who have perished is Sub-Lieutenant the Hon. Edward Robert Gifford, next brother to Lord Gifford. The Eurydice was accompanied from Portsmouth by the training-brig Martin, and was joined at Madeira by the Liberty from Plymouth. These vessels were filled with ordinary seamen, whom it was considered necessary to inure to the sea by a long cruise : and. as they were all draughted from the home training-ships, the distress caused by their loss is spread over the whole country. They were young and mostly unmarried men ; in this respect the crew differs from that of the Captain, who were principally able-bodied seamen and petty officers. The Liberty arrived at Portsmouth a few days ago, the Eurydice being detained for the purpose of taking up supernumeraries. Captain Hare, however, expected to be home almost as soon as the Martin.

The Eurydice left Bermuda on the 6th inst., and nothing was heard of her until she was seen by the coastguard at Bonchurch, at 3.30 on Sunday afternoon, bearing for Spithead under all plain sail, and with her port stunsails set on the fore-topmast and maintopinast, the object being clearly to arrive at the anchorage at Spithead before nightfall. There was an ominous stillness prevailing at this time. A heavy bank of clouds was coming down from the north-west, and the glass was falling rapidly. Such wind as there was came from the westward, and blew on the port quarter of the ship.

The Isle of Wight is of peculiar formation on its southern fringe, having what may be considered as a double coast line extending from Blackgang Chine as far as Shanklin. The inner circle of the downs reaches a height of 500 ft. above the sea, and affords a deceptive shelter to ships well in shore. From the direction in which the Eurydice was steering she would be in comparatively smooth water, sheltered by the downs, until she rounded Dunnose Head, where the disaster occurred. This circumstance will also serve to explain the fact that the Emma, schooner, which was near at the time, was not affected by the gale.

At ten minutes to four the wind suddenly veered round from the west to the eastward, and a gale, accompanied by a blinding fall of snow, came rushing from the high lands down Luccombe Chine, striking the Eurydice just a little before the beam, driving her out of her course, which was heading to the north-east, and turning her bows to the east. This is what seems probable, though, from the manner in which the sea was concealed by the snow, nothing was seen of her at the supreme moment when she capsized to starboard. The air cleared as suddenly as it became overcast, the wind sinking away at the same time. 

As soon as anything could be seen, the masts and top-hamper of the ship were discerned above the water about 2 3/4 miles ENE. off Dunnose, a well-known and lofty landmark between Shanklin and Ventnor. The ship lies in eleven fathoms of water, and from her position she appears to have righted in going down.

Of the whole number of souls on board, only two persons succeeded in reaching the shore alive. These are an able seaman named Benjamin Cuddiford, a native of Plymouth, and Sydney Fletcher, an ordinary first-class seaman, aged nineteen, belonging to Bristol. Lieutenant Tabor died before reaching the shore, and the only other bodies which have been recovered are those of Colonel Ferrier, R.E., and a petty officer named Bennett. Their bodies, which were picked up as they drifted towards Ventnor on an ebb tide, were taken into a cottage at Ventnor, to await the Coroner's inquiry.

The two survivors were first taken to the Esplanade and subsequently to the Cottage Hospital at Bonchurch, where they were attended by Dr. Williamson, of Ventnor, for the night. They were both brought over to Portsmouth on Monday afternoon. Much surprise has been caused by the small number rescued, and this more especially as the time being at hand for the changing of the watch a great many men would be on deck at the time. It appears, too, that the crew were assembling for prayers. Ordinary seamen are taught swimming as part of their training for the sea. No doubt numbers threw themselves overboard when the ship capsized, and were sucked down by the ship and carried out to sea by the tide ; but it is likely that the majority succumbed through becoming chilled by the cold

Captain Langworthy Jenkins, master of the Emma schooner, bound from Newcastle for Poole with coals, was the means of rescuing the survivors, and brought his ship into Portsmouth. He states that at forty-five minutes past four on Sunday afternoon, after a heavy squall, the atmosphere cleared, and he observed some wreckage and the royals of a ship flapping above the water. He also fancied he heard some one shouting for assistance. He sent a man into the rigging to look out, who reported that he saw a man floating in the water with a cork jacket. He immediately made sail and stood towards him. Having to tack once to fetch him, he hoisted out boats, which picked up four men, and one man was picked up from the ship. He did his best to restore their circulation, but one of the men had died before he was got on board. Captain Jenkins then stood for Ventor with colours half-mast high and a boat came off. A doctor was sent for, but two other men died before he arrived. The Coastguard boat afterwards came alongside with Commander Roach, who recognised the body of Lieutenant Tabor, the First Lieutenant of the Eurydice, and the other as an officer of the Royal Engineers. When the men were picked up, Dunnoee bore NW. by W. three to four miles.
 
The boy Fletcher is too weak to furnish full particulars of the sad affair. He states, however, that he was below with the greater part of the crew, when, hearing a noise, he rushed up the hatchway and heard a cry, "All hands for themselves !" He caught a life-buoy and jumped overboard, as did also the rest who were picked up. A minute afterwards the ship gave a lurch forward and sank, drawing him down to a considerable distance; but the life-buoy raised him again. In an account given by Cuddiford, which we insert below, is stated that the ship capsized in a squall and snowstorm, at, as nearly as he can state, four o'clock in the afternoon, when they were five miles from Dunnose. There were over 300 men on board, all of whom, except himself and Sydney Fletcher, who belonged to the Rover, were, he thought, drowned.

A telegram having been forwarded on Sunday evening to the Commander-in-Chief at Portsmouth informing him of the occurrence, Admiral Fanshawe at once dispatched the two Government tugs the Grinder and the Camel to the wreck, in charge of Commanders Polkinghome and Dathan, the two Master Attendants of the yard. The wreck was reached about midnight. The ship was found lying on her starboard bilge, on a fine sandy beach, in eleven fathoms of water, and with her head about south-east, having almost slewed round during the circular storm. Her fore and mizen topgallant masts had been carried away, the topgallant sails hung before the topsails, with the main topgallant masts standing, and all her sails set. Leaving Commander Dathan in charge of the wreck, Commander Polkinghome came back to Portsmouth at five o'clock on Monday morning to report to the Commander-in-Chief and to dispatch the requisite aid. The Grinder accordingly sailed to the spot with twenty-five riggers, some shipwrights, and a couple of divers, with the necessary gear. The sails and tophamper of the wreck were removed, and the tugs will remain to watch the spot. There will be no difficulty in raising the ship by means of lumps. As a matter of form, a court-martial will be held upon the two survivors. These two on arrival at Portsmouth, were taken to Admiralty House, before the Commander-in-Chief, and were afterwards taken to Ventnor, in order that they might give evidence before the county Coroner for the Isle of Wight. Before leaving Portsmouth, Cuddiford made a statement to Admiral Foley of the circumstances attending the wreck. He said: 

"At seven bells on Sunday afternoon the watch at a quarter to four o’clock was called to take in lower studdingsails. I was on deck to tend the lower tack, and let it go. The Captain gave orders to take in the upper sails. The wind was then freshening. The Captain ordered the men to come down from aloft and then to let go the topsail-halliards. The gunner's mate let go the topsail-halliards, and another man, Bryant, let the mainsheet. The water was then running over the lee netting on the starboard side, and washed away the cutter. The foretopmast studding-sail was set. The wind was about a point abaft the port beam. I caught hold of the main truss, fell, and caught hold of the weather netting and got on the ship’s side. We could see her keel. She righted a little before going down, ringing the mizen-topsail out of the water. She then went gradually over from forward, the greater part of the hands being at the forepart of the ship outside. She then turned over, bringing the port cutter bottom upwards. I and another, Richards, out the foremost gripe, and then saw the Captain standing on the vessel's side near the quarter-boat and the two doctors struggling in the water. I swam some distance, keeping over my head a lifebuoy, which I found, and then picked up some piece of wreck, which I gave to some of the men in the water. I then came across the copper punt full of water, five men were it. The sea capsized the punt, and they all got on the bottom. They asked me if there was any signs of help. I told them that the best thing they could do was to keep their spirits up. One of them was just letting go his hold of the punt. Ido not know his name. I next saw Mr. Brewer, the boatswain, with a cork lifebelt on. He was struggling strongly. I then saw Fletcher in the water with a cork belt and breaker. I lost sight of him during the snow. About five minutes afterwards the weather cleared up. I saw Fletcher again, and we kept together. Then we saw land, but, finding it too rough, we turned our backs to the land and saw a schooner. The schooner bore down on us, sent a boat, and picked up two officers that I had not previously noticed with a wash-deck locker. A rope's end was thrown to me from the schooner, and I was then picked up. I judge that I was in the water one hour and twenty minutes. The officers picked up were Lieutenant Tabor and a captain of the Royal Engineers who came on board at Bermuda with one corporal, one bombardier, four privates, and a servant of officer of the Royal Engineers. The ship capsized about ten minutes before four o'clock. The captain was giving orders at the time, and was carrying out his duty. We rounded on the weather beam, and set the lower studding-sail, at two p.m. The ship was then going eight knots and a half. I don't know who was the officer of the watch, as the captain was carrying on the duty. The Hon. Mr. Gifford went to the wheel to help at the time the water was coming over the lee nettings, in consequence of an order being given to put the helm up. There were the following supernumeraries on board :—Three court-martial prisoners from the Rover; one A.B., court-martial prisoner from Bermuda; an ordinary seaman, named Parker, who had been tried by court-martial (he belonged to the Eurydice); and about twelve or fourteen Marines, with one sergeant of Marines from Bermuda Dockyard, two invalids from Bermuda Hospital, one ship's corporal from the Argus, one captain's cook from the Argus, one engineer's steward from the Argus, one ship's cook from Bermuda Dockyard, one quartermaster, named Nicholas, from the Rover. I believe some of the maindeck ports were open to let in the air to the main-deck mess. I don't think the hands were turned ; there was hardly time for that. I saw most of the men forward take off their clothes and jump off before I lost sight of them in the squall. When the snow cleared the ship was gone down."

During Monday the Commander-in-Chief at Portsmouth was in constant communication with her Majesty and the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty; and in the course of the day he received the following telegrams from the Queen. The first, which came direct from her Majesty, was in the following terms:—

"The Queen is deeply grieved to hear of the loss of the Eurydice. Her Majesty anxiously asks for further details."

The second was transmitted to the First Lord of the Admiralty, and was to the following effect:—

"The Queen would ask Mr. Smith to make known her grief at the terrible calamity to the Eurydioe, and her heartfelt sympathy with the afflicted friends and relatives."

In another telegram to Mr. Smith the Queen said the telegrams had caused her the greatest grief. These telegrams, haying been forwarded to Admiral Fanshawe, were promptly posted at the dockyard gates, where they were eagerly read by sympathetic crowds.

Admiral Foley visited the wreck in the course of the afternoon, and, from an examination of the rigging and gear of the ship, he is firmly of opinion that the crew were in the act of shortening sail at the time the ship sank. In this opinion he is supported by the pilots who are assisting at the wreck. They found that the topsails had been let go, and that the mizentopsail was actually resting on the cap. The squall, however was evidently too sudden and powerful for the crew to relieve the ship in time. There is also reason for concluding that the ports on both sides were open, and that the water rushed in on the starboard side, which prevented the ship from righting and pulled her over. The divers and riggers were engaged on Monday in relieving the wreck of her spars and sails. No attempt has yet been made to penetrate below decks. It is expected that a month will elapse before the ship can be raised and brought into harbour.

The inquest on the bodies of Lieutenant Tabor, Captain Louis Ferrier, R.E., and an ordinary seaman named Bennett, was held at Ventnor on Tuesday, by Mr. F. Blake, Coroner for the Isle of Wight. Mr. E. J. Harvey, of Portsmouth, attended as agent for the Admiralty, with Commander Roche, of the Coastguard. The principal evidence was that of Benjamin Cuddiford and of Sydney Fletcher the only survivors from the Eurydice; and that of Captain Jenkins, master of the Emma schooner, which they were picked up. The statement of Cuddiford at the inquest was not materially different from that which he had before made to the Port Admiral, and which is given above; it was confirmed by the evidence of Fletcher. The jury found, as their verdict, that the deceased persons "were accidentally drowned by the capsizing of H.M.S. Eurydice a sudden squall, and that no blame whatever can be attached to the captain, officers, and men of the ship."

A committee has been formed at Portsmouth, and another in London, to raise money for the benefit of the families of the seamen and marines who have lost their lives this disaster. Messrs. Glyn, Mills, and Co., of Lombard-street, and Messrs. Cocks and Biddulph, of Charing-cross, receive subscriptions for this purpose. The members of the House of Commons have made a special subscription amongst themselves.

Our Illustration of the foundering of the Eurydice, which forms the large Engraving presented for the Extra Supplement this week, has been drawn by the aid of Sketches and verbal description supplied by the seaman Benjamin Cuddiford, one of the two survivors of the crew.
