# Loss of the Orpheus


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001365/18630321/054/0004

Portsmouth Times and Naval Gazette

Saturday 21 March 1863

p4

Appointments

Surgeon. Rickard Pickets. to the Orpheus.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001365/18630404/049/0005
Portsmouth Times and Naval Gazette

Saturday 04 April 1863
p5

LOSS OF HER MAJESTY’S SHIP ORPHEUS OFFICERS, AND CREW

Melbourne, Feb. 23rd.—  
Dissatisfaction prevails the Council at the proposal of England to renew the transportation system.

Intelligence received here from New Zealand announces the total wreck her Majesty’s ship Orpheus on Manakan Bar. Commodore Burnett and Commander Burton, together with 188 men, officers and crew, were drowned. The Admiralty have received the following telegram:—

"Suez, April 2nd. —Her Majesty's ship Orpheus was total wreck off Manakaon Bar, New Zealand, on the 7th of February, with loss of Commodore Burnet. 22 officers and 157 men. Nothing saved. List of survivors, officers and 62 men. The names of the officers are, —Charles Hill, Lieutenant, Yong (supposed to be Lieutenant D. D. Yonge), Amphlett (paymaster), Hunt (supposed to be C. G. Hunt, midshipman), Fielding (supposed to be B. W. Fielding, midshipman), H. Barclay (naval cadet), W. Mason (boatswain), J. Beer (carpenter). Further information will be given respecting the names of the surviving seamen. Owing to the incorrect spelling of the telegram, it is impossible to give the names with any hope of accuracy until they have been compared with records in office."

---


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18630404/008/0004#

Hampshire Telegraph
 Saturday 04 April 1863

p4

NAVAL AND MILITARY NEWS

WRECK OF H.M.S. ORPHEUS.

GREAT LOSS of OF LIFE. 

We regret to learn that intelligence has been received at Melbourne, from New Zealand, announcing the total wreck of the Orpheus, 2l, screw corvette, Commander R. H. Burton, bearing the broad pendant of Commodore W. F. Burnett, C.B.. She is reported to have gone ashore on the Manakan Bar, and both the Commodore and Commander, together with 188 officers and men, are said to be drowned.

The Admiralty have received the following telegram:—

SUEZ, April 2.

H.M.S. Orpheus totally wrecked on Manakan Bar, New Zealand, 7th of February, 1863, with the loss of Commodore Barnett, 22 officers, and 157 men. Nothing saved. List of sruvivors: Eight officers and 62 men, in including Charles Hill (lieutenant), Yonge (supposed to be Lieuteniant, D. D. Yonge), Amphlett (Paymaster), Hund (supposed to he C. G. Hurst, midshipman), Filding (supposed to be B. W. Fielding, midshipman), H. M. Barclay (naval cadet), W. Mason (boatswain), P. Beer a (carpenter).

Further information will he given respecting the names of the surviving seamen, but owing to incorrect spelling in the telegram it is impossible to give the names with any hope of accuracy until they have been compared with records in the office.

The Orpheus was commissioned in October, 1861, by Captain William F. Burnett, C.B., who was promoted to a Commodore of the Second Class in July, 1862. She left of Spithead on Thursday, the 5th of December, 1861, and arrived at Plymouth on the following daty. She there embarked a quanitity of warm clothing for the English troops in Canada, and sailed for British North America, on Tuesday evening, the 10th of December, convoying the of Melbourne, steam transport, heavily laden with munitions of war. She subsequently proceeded to the Australian station to relieve the Pelorus, 21, screw corvette, bearing the broad pendant of Commodore F. B. P. Seymour,C.B.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000495/18630411/033/0004


Hampshire Advertiser

Saturday 11 April 1863

p4

THE WRECK OF H.M.S. ORPHEUS.

Some little confusion prevails as to the exact locality of the wreck of H.M.S. Orpheus. The telegram states the wreck to have taken place at the entrance of Manakaou Harbour. Manukau Harbour, which is the place probably mean-, is on the west coast of the North Island of New Zealand. At the head of this harbour is Onchimga, a pensioners' settlement. This is about six miles from Aukland, the capital of New Zealand, and therefore persons, not acquainted with the exact geography of the locality, on loo ing casually at a map are liable to regard the Manukau Harbour as the entrance to Auckland. Auckland harbour, however, is on the east side of the island, and some 400 miles from Manukau round the North Cape by water, although only six miles by land. Auckland Harbour is very extensive and easy of access under all circumstances. On the other hand, Manukau Harbour, although of considerable extent and depth, has, like all the harbours on the west coast of New Zealand, a dangerous bar. In consequence of the position of Manukau Harbour with reference to Auckland, it is often used by vessels coming from Australia or Saranki, the seat of the disturbances in New Zealand, for the purpose of reaching Auckland. Coming from either of these directions the saving of distance would be nearly 400 miles. Thus it will be seen how the Manukau has got confounded with Auckland Harbour, and that the former is on  the west coast and dangerous and the latter on the east coast and not dangerous, and that it was on the Manukau Bar that the Orpheus met her fate.

The following intelligence has been received by  the Secretary of  the Admiralty : —

" Suez, April 2. - Her Majesty's ship Orpheus was a total wreck on Manakaou Bar, New Zealand, February 7, 18G3, with loss of Commodore Burnett, 22 officers, and 157 men. Nothing saved."

The Secretary of the Admiralty begs to enclose herewith a copy of the list of the surviving officers and men of the Orpheus, according to the telegram received at the Admiralty yesterday, with a list of persons borne on  the ship's books, supposed to be referred to in the telegram.

Admiralty, April 4, 1863.

"Admiralty, Somerset House, April 4, 1863. " Department of the Accountant General of the Navy. — List of officers and men saved from her Majesty's ship Orpheus, per telegram: —

| Names as stated in Telegram| Names as they appear on the Ship's Books.|
|===|===|
| | OFFICERS. |
|Mr. Chas. Hill... |Lieut. Charles Hill|
| Mr. Yonge | Probably Lieut. D. D. Yonge, belonging to *Pioneer*.|
|Mr. Amphlett...| Mr. E. A. Amphlett, paymaster.|
| Mr. Hund | C. G. Hunt, midshipman.|
| Mr. Filding |B. W. Fielding, midshipman.|
| Mr. Barkly| H. M. Barkly, midshipman.|
| Mr. Mason |W. Mason, boatswain.|
| Mr. Beer. |John Beer, carpenter.|
| |  SEAMEN.|
| H. Brown |Henry Brown, quartermaster.|
|Bales |Probably W. E. Baylis, painter. |
|Morley |John Morley, captain forecastle. |
|J. Wilson|There are two men of the name (one Josh. W. Wilson, captain hold, the other James Wilson, captain foretop.|
| Finnis |John Finnis, captain maintop.|
| Stupple| Henry Stupple, boatswain's mate.|
| Oliert| W. Oliert (alias Alex. Hills), signalman.|
| Weir |Chas. Weir, captain mast.|
| Kennedy| James Kennedy, ditto.|
| Carpenter |Robert Carpenter, coxswain cutter.|
| Wm. Johnson... |Wm. Johnson, captain mizentop.|
| J. Russell |J. J. Russell (there is a T. Russell, A.B.)|
|W. Russell |Wm. Russell, ordinary second class.|
| Ward /...| George Ward, A.B.|
| Mayes| William Mayes, A.B. |
|Walker| Henry J. Walker, A.B. |
|J. Hall | There are two men of this name, John J. (1), ordinary, and James Hall, ordinary.|
| Quinton| John Quinton, captain foretop. |
|Walsh |Edward Walsh, ordinary.|
| Parsons |James Parsons, ordinary. |
|Horrigan |John Horrigan, commodore's servant.|
| Nicholson |John Nicholson, carpenter's crew. |
|Briggs |Edward Briggs, carpenter's crew.|
| Partbury| Henry Portbury, A.B.|
| Doly |Patrick Dalay, A.B.|
| Koop| Probably Henry Corps, quartermaster ; no man of the name of Koop. |
|Taylor| James Taylor, stoker.|
|Clus| (William Clews, stoker, run away, 14th September, 1862; nothing to show that he returned to the ship. |
|Criersen, R.M.| Joseph Crousen, drummer, R.M.|
| Rolf RM | No such name (there is a R. Roe, private, R.M.)|
| Betortelp| Probably Henry Bentlett, boy, 1st class. |
|Izers| Cannot be identified; no name resembling this on the books.| Bannister| No such name on the books to Dec. 31, 1862, | latest returns.|
| Hunt |Probably John Higham, A.B.|
| Hudosted |Probably Geo. Hurlston, boy 1st class. |
|Burton| Thos. H. Burton, boy 1st class. |
|JUbert|No man of the name (there are two men of the name of Herbert, viz., T. Herbert, A.B., and W. Herbert, boy 2nd class.|
| Ideson| John D. Ideson, boy 2nd class.|
| Butler| No such name ou the books to Dec. 31, 1862, the latest returns received. |
|R. Young | No R. Young; there is John Young, ordinary, and George Young, A.B.|
| Palin| Wm. Palin, A.B.|
| Geary| Thomas Geary, A.B.|
| Fisked |Probably William Fisher, A.B.|
| James | No man of this name.|
| Brown | No James Brown ; there is an Alfred Brown, stoker.|
| Snudden |Thomas Snudden, A.B. |
|Hubert | Probably one of the Herberts mentioned  above. |
|Caland |Probably James Boland, ordinary.|
| Sparshott |William Sparshott, ordinary 2nd class.|
| Wells | Noah Wells, ordinary 2nd class.|
| Ankell | Alfred Ankelt, ordinary 2nd class. |
|Cochine |J. G. Cochrane, ordinary 2nd class. |
|Roberts| George Roberts, ordinary. |
|Quille | Probably George Turtle, ordinary.| 
|Sul | Probably John G. Scale, ordinary. |
|Newman |Henry Newman, ordinary 2nd class.|
| Pilbrow |Probably Alfred Pilbeam, ordinary.|
| Hahrg | Probably Arthur Haggis, captain cox. |
|Laryish |Probably William Langush, ordinary.|
| Tilley| Arthur S. Tilley, ordinary.|
| Jordan |Joseph Jordan. |
|Grann |Probably |Henry J. Graham, ordinary.|
|J. Graam | James Graham, ordinary.|

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18630411/012/0004
Hampshire Telegraph
Saturday 11 April 1863

p4
NAVAL AND MILITARY NEWS. THE LOSS OF THE ORPHEUS.

The following intelligence has been received from the Admiralty:- t "Admiralty, Somersot-hlonse, April 4, 1863. if DEFARTMENT OF TME AccouNTANT.GENERAL OF THE C O NAvY.-List of officers and men saved from her Majesty's r ship orplfltes, p~er telegram .- n a hp' ok~ e Nmcs as stated Names as they appear on thc ship's books, b lt in telegram. , Mr. Charles Hill ?? Lieutenaset Clmarles Hlll. . Y Mr. Yinge. .. {robably Lieutenauet D. D. Yougo,belonging to 1 Y lr.l gc ?? * tPionee: at lIr. Amphlett ?? Mr. E. A. Amphlett, paymaster. v Mr. Tlund ?? C. G. Hunt, midshilpmanr 'Mr. Filding . B. W. Fielding, neidshipman. 1 lr, BaMe.yP ?? I. M. Barkly, midshipman. c Mr, Mason ?? W. Mason, boatswain. . t He.r Bcer ?? Beer, carpenter. d H1. Broen, ?? Henry Brown, quartcrmaster. s e hles ?? , Prlobably W. E. Bayliss, painter. s Morley ?? Morley, captain forecastle. (There are two men of the name (one Josh. 'e J. Wilson ?? . W Wilson, captain hold, the otlier James Wilson, captain foretop). 0 d Finnis ?? Fineeie, captain maintop. qr Stuppl ?? Stupple, boatswain's mate. Oliert ?? Oilcrt (alias Alex. Hills), oignalman. t n Weir ?? Charles Weir, captain mist. c a Cenndy ?? James Kennedy, dtito. Carl eeter ?? R obert Carpoater, coxswain cutter. 0 William Johnsome William Johnson, captain mizen top. d J. Russell . J. J. Russell (therc is a Thbomas Russell, ?? - W. Russell William Russell, ordinary second class. I o Ward ?? George Ward, An. O Mayes ?? William Ma)es, A.B. Walker ?? Henry J. Walker, A.B. C J. Hall ?? There are two men of this name, Jolhn Hall, (1) J. ordinary, and James Hall, ordinary. t Quinton ?? John Quinton, captain foretop. r ?? Edward Walsh, ordinary. 2 Parson ?? James ParsODs, ordliary. 7 o Horr . Josn lorrigau, commodore's scervant. , 1 Ni.h. , ?? John Nicholson, carpentcr's crew. ?? ?? ,Edward Briggs, carpenter's crew. a Partbary ?? Portbury, e.. Doley ?? . Patrick DaleY, A.B, 0 e IProbably Hoesry Corps, quartermaster: no man I loop ?? cof tle sams of Kosp. C ?? James Taylor, stoker. ?? Cl]ws stoker, ran away Ssptember 14, ?? . ?? that he returned to . t theship. i Ciecrson, ,X ?? Josph Crouson, mers n .m. Polf, r. , No such name (thsr. is a R. Roe, private see.) ,1 .. Btortel ?? Probably Henry Benthett, boy, 1st class. P 3 e.. Canot be ideatilled s name resemblieg this a rs ?? on the books. i SNo suob saame on the books to Dec. 31, 1862 a e Bannisltest returns. c Kant ?? Probably Johbs Higham , A.B. 2 Hudosted ?? Probably George Hurlstonc, boy let class. , Burtos ?? Thomas H. Blsrton, boy 1st class. ( ?? man of the namne (there are two men of the Hubert ?? name of lcrbert, viz., T. Herbert, A.B., and r, lt ?? Herbert, boy 2snd class.) a r Mdeson ?? John D. Ideson, boy 2nd class. Ib B . No such name on the books to Dcc. 31, 1822, r, u latest returns. R. Y ?? It. Young; there is John Young, ordinary, H. Young ?? George Young, A.B. Palin ?? William Palin, A.B. t 1 Geary . ?? Thomns Geary, A.3. 6 ?? Probably William Fisher, A.D. C' r James ?? No man of this name. la ?? No James Brown; there is an Alfred Browse, r B. stoker. Snudden ?? homas Sesudden, A,n. ?? osso of the Herberts mentioned above. a Caland ?? Probably James Boland, ordinary. S1 a Sparshott ?? 'WilliamnSparsbott, ordinary 2nd class. e Wells ?? . Noah Wells, ordinary 2nd elass. t Anll ?? Alfred Asnkelt, ordinary 2nd class . Cochins ?? J. G. eCoehrane, ordinary 2nld class. Roberts ?? George Roberts, ordinary. r B Quill ?? ?? George Turtle, ordinary. Sul ?? Probabl Jein G. Scale, ordinary. Nowninn ?? ,lenry Newsman, ordinary 2nd class. u s Pilbrow ?? Probably Alfred Pilbeanm, ordinary. ?? Probably Arthur Haggis, captaiu's coswaein. 5 B ?? Probably William Lan-usli, ordinary.h Tillcy ?? Arthlur S. Tilley, ordinary. Jordan ?? Joseph Jordan. c D ?? . ., Probably Xesery .1. Graham, ordinary. s J. Grnanm. James Graham, ordissary," 5. k e Commodore William Fncqlabarson Burnett, C.B., was Y born in 1816, paused his examilsaation in 1834, and ob- I tained his comnmission as lieuteseant June 28, 1838. He was appoisted Jnly 26 to tse Rodney, 92, is the b lediter- 1 rassems and exclhnged into the PMesuevbus, stena-sloop, as t fairst lientsinint, employed on the same station, October a 1,k 14Padremained until theclose of 1844. He became 1 .irsleutflet.of'-he Eaglae, 50, -December .19, 1844, and aafter serving on the southeast coast of Africa, aiad onl theC North Amierican and West India stations, wvas promoted Li o comma nder November 9, 1844, and ats such served in I the Queen, 116, in the Mediterranean, ait .Devouport; again in the Mediterranean and Black Seai fleet, from I e June, I1851., until promoted to post rank, November 13, a 1854. He commanded the Tortoisee, 12, and Meander, 44, storesbips, at the Island of Ascension, January, 1818, to a February, 186]. He commissioned the Orphleus, 21, in I 'e October, 1861, and sailed in December following for North Ameriep., He left Bermuda for Australia March,I 18632, was at Simon's Bay in May, and arrived at Sydney a le Consaander Robert Heron Burton was born in 1829, and entered the navy in 1841. He was employed on the coast 10 of China and in the East Indies for five years inl the af Agiawawvrl, 72, and served in the launch at the destruction ec of the piratical f±brts at Maluda Bay, in 1845. He was in the expedition to, ]Brni, Borneo, in 18443. He passed his 10examination in 1848, ann, after serving on the home station,I ha was iiromoted to lieutenant October 19, 18419. He was I lieutenant of the Hea'naea, 63, from January, 1850, to Juase, It 154,andco-operated with the army during the Kaffir 11witr in 1853 was present at tlse storming and capture of 'e Martaban and Rangoon, in 1852, and was gazetted for hisI ;h ?? while in action with rebei warl junks and baite.I ric annd for his successful command of boats in numerous d encounters with pirates. From June, 1854, until the a le spring of 1857 lie was first lieutenant of thle 3llelacca, 17, ,.employed on particular service. The 21alaecea accompa- nied the late Prince Consort onl a visit to the Emperor of Le the French in September, 1854. She also masde it trialI .e trip to the coast of Scotland, and escorted her Majesty .efrom Hull to Grimsby, and in D~ecember, 1854, made at revoyage to the Crimes, amnd she afterwards wvent to the I 1- Tagus to pay homage to the King of Portugal on his ac-I cession to tlse throne, and ultimately proceeded to the I WVest Indies. He commanded the Triton, 3, on tue WestI Coaist of Africa, from October, 1857, until the spring of I 1851;,was advanced to the rank of commander January a ,.31, 18431; and had been employed as commander of the eabove vessel since November 22, 1801. -- d It will, of course, be impossible to obtain any correctI Is details of this catastrophe until thme arrival of the next Australian mail.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001928/18630415/035/0003
Eastbourne Gazette 
Wednesday 15 April 1863

p3

THE LOSS OF H.M.S. ORPHEUS.

The loss of a ship of war with her captain and two-thirds of her crew is happily an event thane modern days as rare as it is appalling (remarks the new). Gradually, however, and by successive in. stalemate of intelligence, the public has leant that one of the finest corvettes of her Majesty's navy has been totally wrecked in fair weather and broad day. light, and that of the =4a officers, smarm, and marines who corapamd her mew, simenty-or col are now surviving. Ths °Thom was • new 1,700 tom and 400-home pow, miming twistyens heavy gaga On the SIM Jammer, lest SIM Wt Sydney for New &shad, and duly arrived of the mast of that country, after • fine peerage. se the morning of Saturday, the 7th of February. Sim was then shad eight miles ofr the bar of the Zdanti. ken. The Maankau harbour is a lore harbour on the coast of the North Island, approached by a entrees, divided Wee &Mind channels. It. northern. .hors is formed by the territory of Auckland, the capital of the settlement being ea the endwn come, at ns dimities.** hem the Ihmekan water. 1 enter this harbour it is necessary to cross a ltar—w chaperons operatics' at all times, and peceharly so . me the wall coast of New &AMA where the sands composing the bass at sumsthe mom perpetually shifting, mad whets a west r to went wind drives • see mesa** shoce. So well is 'Penh M. known thelfailmee ere made as fat a Vane it is attem A. pted. antes t own ex; tat whilid den was a "a a prepared. talles. w tre saptain "weir the ladies bolo had gob ad isedligib mint down, and mauled rings on Leap do An.* ;laid meta sad an able.Yedfod wheel, while mom imedy_to take tie ." Smiler I`ems ler' vYi tln bed on the d flifewely. don not eat say of She on must an VIM roglored Aa the mai I *re Mk irk. the ea. the end tie beidge. ia bath =spas lifer skipped oda tribe rod bateirry corns were pima &rem." The drip wee bat ✓em led bre got up in tint eel the we err* welly to the bid dorm tie ming dividers lei Im wag tie, the bar. It id bon mi KS/ woo butane Wino* dom *ell mare wesvollilig ma," says Lime. dupe co Ong Tbri burl led toe" rare tie sigma "Tabs Ibe he boss If rag U. 30. All lib elm think* sus to lore bra rig* and rtouched the ems a wreak. die _Pima AO* tie after inert at I.* err Wk. Wier. to poi eft, Tea oboes eftrowarde mr - lerward. mad "Astern WWI" yea how t neither sir sew be Ineeeld Tio net eliormier, rip with bee to tine delft immily he p and tie rearm seeliell trio the west redo A ohm sweep el bra erection(' the parquets to be thro4 was area, lightened of dd... 'g m the ender owe erred and private oldie boobs, _ .... e . t0g0t dear et Ihe ship, hat an b er Nom w e lima wag ha ft iwillie r em was w i th sad teethe ear Thus two bade were ad dm de her • er el th. ale aka tee eider, it was sore bedew mitred he lent *id the with The el de CIO= Ii pike beak% air Wag sod el the Maari row *de emider• and lime Payrossisminithiw of sum eidi ante Ile der they mweseded odour the atereere Marra sad &dee with her. dikeilew leek then' both is tow, eed theureeeired Or die wash, it way sow sr* The masts of the esthetes , . still elandlog, bat threw was swing in hvge roller err her. awl the lied. keen river/kg dere the Muir ' Of Pea kb die Wag ate' ea the rare et or belle &upped down or tasty of thew mad in tideway 0 awed.. The ether sane IN weal aid the slip broke up, bat them was no him of remained Meek' path and duty to thelad, giddy the.. awn who the redo weep "sat takmg farewells! Ala" The enyinim fell coarboasd with sae of the math, remind a biome we thebeed from err, and slimed no mem Naysuoma dosed be upon the sus , and whir da broker ones more., of ewe iamb: • kw ribs wee that eieldi he lees of the 4 4 ion teed T er . decor ns eArir a ttee o p t e o ttio de dell weed ariai 4 ia did Mils we lie whisk 'll.4llller NO dear tie petioles %eine; Ise died whir /shifted hod '.ly the melts I this is the am. be wire andonsvbut we truth that snob • fact will not pees without some willowy. PoseilAy, the shifting othraciter of these tiewhereas renders it impossible to give as accurate chart of the llanokau pasinge—iarteed, we are informed that the bars do shift with almost every heavy But in that cam it is evident that sailing dinettes, are a mockery, sad that say rural 'lnking the ha.- at almost any tins is exposed the fate which betel the Orpheus. The thiliory of the disaster, than -fore, io plain throughout ; bat it certainly is. as char why four protases sad moat critical he ars should have been allowed to elapse before me istance wax carried to the wreck by the Wong:AV °cgs. The official despatoh, while giving all treat t to the captain of the steamer for the aid - ultimatel meedered, speaks of thiohlay as iineenountabla; A a ac,ount, however, has been gran by the captain himself, and it appeared in our columns of yeatenlay. lie states that be was steaming cat .of the south channel be observed a trarrar in the offing. but says Doggies of her psi*a at that moment. On getting ohm. tie the cheineel he notion! her to be ••labouring heavily, and worm etly whore." tlyon thas ve ry moulded tothe outer t rao cc of the north ethanol, bat being amble to be ke it on account of the heavy sea this bar, he set .unard by the south chaseel again, to the pilot . di dim, when he met the two boats of the Orphan.. By that time, however, more than them loam m tut have been lost, and the six o'clock before tie , wee* was actually meshed. Whethee this state neat does or does not aeariol fee the &bp • question which Melly be eYtwW more aosurste details time and thee we at Freest possess, bat all =rift awe in eulogioeg the conduct of the mimesis sad se through the prooerdings which famed, As to the uselessness of the shore lifeboat, kw west of b sada to man her or moms to get beer &teak that circumstance seems to be peeped over without di semm.nt, though it is said that if the could has,. been sent to sea mist of. the lives mcriaoshseii have bees savedl. foam& Mya r? into the carcurnstances of the wreak is et course still to arse, but the story we have told leaves Tory littb m ystsry shout the fete elite nateetneate Orpbr* WeV . :hostel • serum I. well ell. illid.• seder as melee the el VOW II S. lamed the beam a h wee ulna tweeDy was •44 Ow led hems I Its w• la ewe le amp yet peeceemehad. bar, weft eke sib 11. who Vie peer mese need SWAM eel • a rot lima Iles • SOM. -Wee41444111• frogs the la she Mimi= tins et wlieble poppets to ell yew MO the pewit crime two 1 11. eel you Me w the Ire WI lone, 6 as 6 4 Oro lhe roe leo tee =l, 3 le bre lia. lows On bank new 4 4, tee woke 4 Melo es IN le, ). Were lb. 164 vibe mamba 11. IV ° . 10 1 103 1 . Corte= awe= l" los= from Awe yea: • Ott , SOW a ea WM anteing 4 eie *ewes wet le el lee Is eel Ahem MIS. lay et epee 4 peer p 

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000363/18630417/053/0010

Carlisle Journal
Friday 17 April 1863

p10

THE LOSS OF H.M.S. ORPHEUS.

Particulars of the loss of H.M.S. Orpheus off the coast of New Zealand have now beeu received. It appears that the ship struck heavily and became fixed beyoud hope of rescue. Some of the boats were got away and their crews picked up by the Wonga, a steamer which had put out to render assistance. She went up to  the wreck and succeeded saving more lives, but the unfortuuate Orpheus was soon knocked to pieces by the heavy seas. Commodore Burnett was sitting iv the mizen ftitlock rigging when the mast fell over, and the top striking him the doubt rendered him at once iusensible. At any rate he made no effort to save himself.

Lieutenant Charles Hill gives the following report of the melancholy catastrophe to the Lords of the Admiralty :—

Her Majesty's ship Orpheus sailed from Sydney ou the 31st January. After fine passage to the coast of New Zealand, we sighted the land on the morning of the inst.; it was my forenoon watch, at about eight miles from the bar of the Manukau. Steam was got up two boilers we had been condensing. The ship proceeded at 12.30, under all plain sail, with starboard foretopmast studsail set, toward the Manukau, steering east till one o'clock, then N.N.E., being the courses laid down —so the master told me—in Captain Drury's sailing directions, keeping the Nine Pine on with the end of Paratutai. The hands were on deck, the ropes manned for shortening sail; the commodore, commander, and master on the biidge; leadsmen in both chains; spare tiller shipped, with relieving tackles hooked, and six men stationed ; gratings and hatchway-cavers were placed ready for battening down.

" The wind S.W. to S.S.W., force 5 to 6, with occasional slight squalls; high water at 12 20. As we approached the bar there was nothing more to see, in the shape of rollers or sea on, than I had been led to expect. The signal from the pilot station had been flying since 11.30 a.m., 'take the bar ;' the commodore and master were very attentive with the chart on the bridge, and very particular in the steerage of the ship, and his orders to the engine room, to keep the steam at command. The signal officer and signal man on the look out. At about 1.30 she touched slightly in the after part, when the commodore gave the order, 'Give her all the steam you can.' about 1.40 the ship struck forward; order given, 'Astern full speed;' but the engines or screw never moved. At the same time the commodore ordered ' Hands shorten sail.' The ship broached to, with her head to the northward, lurching heavily to port;  the rollers setting in from the westward, which immediately made a clean sweep the upper deck, taking away port quarter boats (second cutter and jolly boat), netting and bulwark. Sail was shortened as far possible; the men not being able to keep the deck, immediately the ship took the ground the hatchways were battened down, which, however, proved perfectly useless, as the fastenings were thrown up by the bumping of the ship.

The commodore then ordered the port guns to be thrown overboard (we succeeded lightening the ship of four guns), and the starboard cutter to be manned and lowered, the paymaster and secretary to place in her his private signals, the public records, and the ship's books; but from the heavy lurching of the ship the men were uuable to pass all the books they wanted ; some were lost overboard. Mr. Fielding had orders to land what he had got and return. After great difficulty the cutter got clear of the ship. She was reported to be swamped two or three times. When seen on one occasion five hands were observed to be missing. It was about this time a steamer was seen coming out of the Heads. The commodore next ordered the pipe, " Hands out boats," yards and stays having previously been triced up. The pinnace was the first boat out. As I was returning from the maintop Commander Burton ordered me into the pinnace to go to the assistance of the cutter; the commodore then came to the starboard gangway, and on my telling him that I had seen the cutter all right when on the mainyard, he ordered me to take Mr. Amphlett, paymaster, who was well acquainted with the place, on shore, for the purpose of getting assistance. Mr. Amphlett was then and there told to jump into the boat; this was at 2.30. We shoved off, and with great difficulty, from the strong ebb, cleared the ship. As we proceeded I observed the smoke of a steamer to the southward, going seaward. After a two hours' pull against heavy rolling sea, we neared the Nine Pine, when I spoke Mr. Wing the pilot-boat. We learnt from him that the steamer in sight (now seen coming up the south channel) was the Wonga Wonga, returning to the Heads, that he had no boat to send to the Harrier to report our distress, that there was a lifeboat hauled up on shore, but no hands or means to get her afloat—it would take 12 men considerable time. The cutter now came up with us. Mr. Wing and his Maories came into the pinnace, while Mr. Amphlett, two sick men and two boys and two others started of in the whaler of the Harrier.

"We pushed on to the steamer, now between the heads, waving, signalising, and making every effort to gain her attention ; after some delay, she turned round and closed us, taking pinnace and cutter in tow, proceeding to the wreck, which we reached at six p.m. I found her very much lying over to port, the masts all standing, the crew in rigging above  the tops, the sea at times sweeping high as the futtock rigging; the sails had been cut away from the yards, it being impossible to furl them. Taking, in addition, the pilot's boat crew, four young Maories with the pinnance being to windward of the wreck, we dropped down to about 30 or 40 yards on her starboard bow, hailed the men on the bow-sprit and jibboom to jump off and swim for it. I picked up seven or eight ; having drifted to leeward, the steamer came and towed me to windward, dropped down a second time with the cutter company. This time three or four more men were taken in in the pinnance, and the boatswain and four or five the cutter. It was now about seven o'clock; the flood tide had made, the rollers soon became very high and dangerous on  the change; the jibboom broke oft short by the cap; it was quite impossible with safety to the boats, to remain any longer by the wreck.As I was going back I shouted to the wreck to make final attempt, but none would venture.

" The steamer picked up boats and anchored close to the north side ofthe South Spit; distant from wreck about threequarters of a mile. This was eight o'clock. At 8 30 the masts went. Boats returned to the wreck. The Wonga kept burning blue ligbts, blowing her steam whistle, and ringing her bell. The pinnace picked up six or eight, and returned to the steamer with one or two in the last stage of exhaustion. On again nearing the wreck I found the ship completely broken up. It was a beautiful clear moonlight night, and masses of the wreck kept passing in with the flood, clinging to which Lieutenant Yonge and six or eight men were saved. The cutter got so far to leeward that she made for the land, the pinnace returning to the steamer. We remained on deck the whole night, keeping a sharp look out. At daylight nothing could be seen of  the ill-fatted Orpheus but a stump of one mast and a few ribs.

" From the commencement, and during the whole proceedings nothing could exceed the coolness and decision of Commodore Burnett, C.B., the commander, and the officers, all in their stations, sentries on the spirit-room and store-rooms ; whilst the good feeling and steadiness of the men was beyond all praise, remaining at their posts until ordered by the commodore to mount the rigging. Many were washed overboard in obeying orders.

"I must not forget to mention the gallant conduct of the Maori crew ; they were first and foremost in saving lives. In going ashore in the cutter, Mr. Hunt and Mr. Barkly (midshipmen), were picked up, one Maori taking Mr. Barkly on his back and carrying him along the beach to his hut. They afterwards gave them food, and put them their own beds for the night.

"William Johnson (captain of  the mizen top) three times jumped out of the pinnace with rope to the rescue, and was the means of saving three drowning men.

"On board the Wonga Wonga, which officers and men reached cold and naked, the greatest kindness and hospitality was shown and continued by all on board, until we were transferred to the Avon." 

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001365/18630418/103/0008
Portsmouth Times and Naval Gazette
Saturday 18 April 1863
p8

THE LOSS OF H.M.S, ORPHEUS.

OFFICIAL REPORTS OF THE WRECK

The following particulars of the circumstances under which this ship together with lives, was lost, have been received by the Admiralty:—

Her Majesty's ship Miranda, Auckland, Feb. 10, 1863.

-My Lord, —In addition to my first letter from the scene of the wreck of Her Majesty's ship Orpheus, dated the 8th inst., sent their Lordships, to save the Southern Mail, by the Wonpa Wonga, I have to enclose for their further information the detail narrative of Lieutenant C. Hill, the second lieutenant, and the senior surviving officer. It is a clear and truthful account of the whole proceedings this melancholy calamity, so far as he and the other officers that are saved are acquainted with them.

"2. According to judgment on the spot, nothing can exceed the exertions of Lieutenant Hill, the other officers, and all the survivors of the crew, who, at the imminent peril of their own lives, continued to the last to make the utmost endeavours to save the lives ot their shipmates.

"3. I am informaed that the Wonga Wanga was at the time of the Orpheus striking steaming out of the south channel of the Manukau. She first steamed outside the bar to the entrance of the main channel, but afterwards turned by the south channel, up the boats Paratutai Point, and towing them to the wreck by the main channel.

[TO DO - SEE FOLLOWING ITEM - BETTER OCR]

"4. Their Lordships will observe from the narrative of 1 i ■utrn-.nt Hill that from the time the steamer was first observed ..I J ..’clock, until she reached the wreck at C, the most’critical .ml invaluable time waa unaccountably las! bu*Caljtaii. llrimer and all board the Wonga Wonga were most kind and hospitable in the treatment of the sufferers when they reached his slop horn the Wr r Wing, pilot, and charge ol the signal station at the Man m. informed that the wreck of the is i). .vi ■■ the heannga laid .1 .wn Captain Drury’s chart and sailing directions since the publication of Which the middle hanks and small shoal which the ship first touched have shifted bodily and considerably to the north. Lordships, 1 d. deplore the loss to HerMaiestv’s service of an officer distinguished Commodore liarnett; it appears met his death, when silting the misen-futtock rigging the mast fell over to p.,rt, and, the top sinking him the head when in the water, it said never made the least exertion to save himself. 7 I have directed Mr. Sullivan to proceed m Her Malesty’a ship Harrier to the Manukau Heads, and to detach officer and party far may consider necessary along tl.e shore, nortli and soulii, for the purpose of burying, with such honours circumstances will admit, the bmlies of any officers and men, iate Her Majesty’s ship Orpheus, which may found, and also to recover such remains of the wreck, public and private, may derm fir ; so soon may consider longer necessary continue this service I have directed him to conduct the duties of senior naval officer in New Zealand. ... , With the view to save the mail which will lea\e Bvdney on the 20lh inst., it is my intention to p oceed once under steam to that port with the six officers and 10 of tile crew of the Orpheus who have been selected os the most able to give evidence relative to the loss that ship. These I propose sending to England the mail steamer; the remaining 51 men and boys have detained for disposal on the station; the majority have already voluntecred for the Miranda and Harrier. I have sent to the Harrier, for about which number she has vacancies to complete her complement. . .. . I have the bonoui to be, Lord, your obedient humble servant, ROBERT JENKINS, Captain anil Senior < Hiker, The Rig'nt Hon. Lord Clarence E. Paget, C.H., Secretary to the Admiralty." *'

 Her Majesty’s ship Miranda, Auckland, New Zealand, February 5. Sir —ln obedience to jour dircctums 1 lm»o honour' report, for the horde Commiesioners of th. AdniiraltT, th»t Her ship Orpheus sailed from Sydney the 31st of Jo.mary. After fine passage to the of Zealand, we aighted the land on the rooming of the 7th insl. ; ray forenoon watch, at about eight miles from the bar of the Manukan. Steam was got in two boiler*; we had been condensing. The ship proceeded 12.30, onder all plain sail, with starboard forotopraasl stud-sail set, towards steering east till 1 o’clock, and then N.K.h.,being the courses laid down—so the master told —in Captain Drury’s sailing directions, keeping the Ninepin with the end I’.iratutai. The hands were dock, the ropes manned for shortening sail, the commodore, commander and master the bridge ; landsmen in both chains ; spare tiller shipped, with reliering tackles hooked, and six men stationed ; gratings and hatchway cov. were placed ready for battening down. ‘'The wind S.W. to S.S.W., force five to six, with occasional slight squalls; high water 12.23. As approached the bar there was nothing more to see, m the shape of rollers sea on, than 1 had been led to expect. The signal from tbo pilot sta'ioii had been flying since 11.30 a.m, ' Take the bar the commodore and master ware very attentive with the chart on the bridge, and very particular in the ateerage of the ship, and hi their orders to the engine-room, to keep the steam command, the signal officer and signalman on the look out. At about 1.30 she touched slightly in the after part, when the commodore gave the order, ‘ her all the steam von can.’ At about l. the ship strucK forward ; order given, Astern full speed but the engines or screw never moved. At the same time the commodore ordered Hands shorten sail.’ The ship broached to, with her head to the northward, lurching heavily to port, Ihe roller setting in from the westward, which immediately made clean sweep of the upper deck, taking away port quarter boats (second cutter and jolly boat), netting, and bulwark. Sail wat shorlened far possible, the men not being able to keep the deck ; immediately the ship took the ground the hatchways were battened down, which, however, proved perfectly useless, fastenings wore throw the bumping the ship. “The commodore then ordered the port guns to thrown overboard (we succeeded in lightening the ship of four guns), and the starboard cutter to manned and lowered, the paymaster and secretary to place in her his private signals, the public records, and the ship’s books; but from the heavy lurching of the ship the men were unable psss all the books they wanted; some were lost overboard. Mr. Kidding bad orders land what had got and return. Alter great difficulty the eutter got clear of the ehip. She was reported to swamped two three times. When seen one occasion five hands were observed to missing. It was ab.u* this time steamer was seen coming out of the U«ds The commodore next ordered the pipe, Hands out boats,’ yards and stays having previously been triced The pinnace was the first boat out. 1 was returning from the maintop Commander Burton ordered into the pinnace to go to the assistance ol the cutter; the commodore then came to the starboard gangway, and on telling him that I had seen the cutter all right when on the main-yard ordered me take Mr. Amphletl, paymaster, who was well acquainted with the place on shore, for the purpose of getting assistance. Mr Amphlett was then and there told to jump into the boat; tills was 2.30. shoved off, and with great difficulty, from the strong ebh, cleared the ship. As proceeded 1 observed the smoke of steamer to the southward, going seaward. After two hours’ pull against heavy rolling sea, wc the Ninepin, when I-■ -jLo Mr. Wing pilot boat. learnt from biin that the steamer sight (now seen coming up the South Channel) wss returning the Heads, that he had no boat to send to the Harrier to report onr distress, that there was a lifeboat hauled on shore, but bands or means to get her afloat; it would take 12 men considerable time. The cutter now with ns; Mr. Wing and his Maories came into 1 ninnace, while Mr. Amphlett, two sick men, and two ; 10 and two others started off in the whaler of the hoys, . mshed to the steamer, now between the . j e ine. signalizing, and making every effort to r -ntioo ; after seme delay she turned round , af taking pinnace and cutter in tow, pro* ns, wreck, which reached at 6 p.m. 1 j.” '. n the . icii lying over to port, the masts ail . .. very m. the rigging above the tops, the sea ndmg, the crew in high as the futtock rigging; the Wepln*; , v from tlie yards, it being im* "1., * ,een * in addition, the pilot’s P««ihle to fur! them. \ "its, with the pinnace being a* . » ot,r young Vfao. dropped down to about 30 the wreck • a the men the . w y? r on her starboard bo* f° . aQ d jibl»ooni to jump o. ‘fted to leeward, the picKv U P or eight; having dward. I dropped steamer towed me to win. company. This down a second time with the cutter t^,c P ,nnace » time three or four more men were taken ve cutter. It and the boatswain and four five in U made, the waa now about 7 o’clock the flood tide bat 18 the rollera soon became very high and daitoero. * lt change; the jibboom broke off abort by cap quite impoaaible, with safety to boata'lp 1 any longfr W the wreck. As was > would »ehwU. 'vreck to final attempt, The »leaui«r pickad up boat* and aochored 
the north side of the South Spit; distant from wreck about three-quarters of a mile. This was at eight o’clock. At 8.30 the masts went. Boats returned to the wreck. The Wonga Wonga kept burning blue lights, blowing her steam whistle, and ringing her bell. The pinnace picked up six or eight, and returned to the steamer with one or two in the last stage of exhaustioa. On again nearing the wreck I found the ship completely broken up. was a beautiful clear moonlight night, and masses of the wreck kept paaaing in with the flood, clinging to which Lieutenant Yonge and six or eight men were saved. The cutter got so far to leeward that she made for the land, the pinnace returning to the steamer. remained deck the whole night, keeping a sharp look-out. At daylight nothing could be seen of the ill-fated Orpheus but stump of one mast and a few ribs. From the commencement »nd daring the whole proceedings nolhiug could exceed the coolne** and decision of Commodore Burnett, C.8., the commander, and the officers, all in their stations, sentries on the spirit room and store rooms; while the good feeling and steadiness of the men whs beyond all praise, remaining their posts until ordered the commodore to mount the rigging. Many were washed overboard in obeying orders. , . . I must not forget to mention the gallant condnet of the Maori crew; they were first and foremost m «**ing lives. On going ashore in the cutter Mr. Hunt and Mr. Darkly (midshipmen) were picked up, one Muon taking Mr. Bark I v on his back and carrying him along the beach to lii*s hut. They afterwards gave them food and put them in their own beds for the night. “William Johnson (captain of the roizentop) three times jumped out the pinnace with a rope to the rescue, and was the means of saving three drowning men. On board the Wonga Wonga, which officers and men reached cold and naked, the greatest kindness and hospitality were shown and continued all on board, until were transfened to the Avon, where had reported myself to yon. 1 have the honour to be, Sir, your obedient servant, “CHARLES HILL, “ Lieutenant Her Majesty’s Ship Orpheus."


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18630418/006/0003
Hampshire Telegraph 
Saturday 18 April 1863

p3

LOSS OF HER MAJESTY'S SHIP ORPHEUS. ADMIRALTY,

ADMIRALTY,  April 12. 18G3.

The Secretary of the Admiralty begs to acquaint the Editor that the intelligence contained in the accompanying document has been received at this office:- 

"Her Majesty's Ship, Miranda, Auckland, Feb. 10, 1803.

My Lord,-In addition to my first letter from the scene of the wreck of Her Majestys ship Orpheus, dated the 8th instant, sent to their Lordsbips, to save the Southern nmMaailnil, by the Wonga Wonga, I have to enclose for their further information the detailed narrative of Lieutenant C. Hill, the second lieutenant, and the senior surviving officer. It is a clear and truthful account of the whole nroceediogs of this melancholy calamnity, so far ashe and the other officers thnt are saved are acquainted with them. 2. According to iny judgment on the spot, nothing can exceed the exertions of Lieutenant Hill, the other offieers, and all the survivors of the cricV, who, at the inmimlinent peril of their own lives, continued to the last to make the utmost endeavours to save the lives of their shipmates. 3. I am informed that the JVony.q IVoan a was at the time of the 0rpike-as striking steaning out of the south channel of the Maunulau. She first steamed outside the bat to the entrance of the main channel, but afterwards returned by the south clannel, pickin g up the ?? off Paratuai Point, and towing them to the wreck by the minita chmsnel. 4a Their lordships will observe from the narrative of Lieutenant 1ill that from the time the steamer was first observed, at two o'clock, until she reached the wreck at six, the most critical and invaluable time was uInaccounta- bly lost, but Captain Renner and all on board the IFonqa Wonga were inest kind and hospitable in the treatment of ?? sufferers when they reached his ship from the wreck. l. Mr. Winlg, pilot, and in charge of the signal station at the Manukau, informed me that the wreck of the Orpieas is precisely on the beatings laid down in Capt. Drury's chart and sailing directions, since the publication of which the middle banks and small shoal on which the ship first touched have shifted bodily and considerably to the north. 0. With their Lordships. I deeply deplore the loss to Her Majesty's service of an odicer so distinguished as Conimo- dore Burnett, it appears he inet hisniuch-tohbe-regretted death when, sitting in the muizen-futteck rigging, the mast fell over to port, and, the top striking him on the head when in the water, it is said he never made the least exer- tion to save himself. 7. I have directed Mr. Sullivan to proceed in Her Ma- jesty's ship Rar-ier tothe Manukanu Heads, tand to detach an officer and party as fhr as he may consider necessary along the shore, north and south, for the purpose of bury- ing with such lionour s as circumstances will admit, thle bodies of any officers and men, lute of Her Majesty's ship Oripfeits, which may be found, and also to recover such re- mains of the wreck, public and private, as lie may deem fit; so sooni as lie may consider it no longer necessary to continue on this service I have directed him to conduct the duties of senior naval officer in New Zealand. 8. With the viewto Qave themnail which will leav ?? on the 20th inst., it is my intention to proceed at once under steam to that port with six officers and ten of the crew of the Orfflment5 who have been selected as the miost able to give evidence relative to the loss of that ship. These I propose sending to England by the mail steamer; the remaining 51 men and boys I have detained for dis- posal on the station; the moajouity have already volun- teered for the IMiranda and Barrier. 1 have sent 25 to the Harrier, for about which number she has vacancies to complete her complement. I have the ?? to be, my Lord, your obedient humble servant, IlonsivT J:nXINs, Captain and Senior Officer. Tue Right Hon. Lord Clarence E. Paget, C.B., Secretary to the Admiralty." 

Her Majesty's ship Miravcda, Auckland, Yew Zealand, February i. Sir,-hI obedience to your directions I have the honour to repeut, for the informaijtion of the Lords Commliasloilers of thme Admnimalty, that her' Majesty's ship Orpheus sailed fionm Sydney on the 31st of Jalnuary. Azvfter a fine passage to thme Coast of N~ew Zealand, eve sighted the land on the morning of the 7th inst.; it was my forenoon wvatch, at about eight miles fr om the bar of thme Manukail. Steam was got up in two boiler s; we lied been condensing. The ship proceeded at 12.80, under all plain sail, with starboard f'oretopmnast studoall set, towards Manuksat, steering ?? till omue o'clockc then ?? being the courses laid down -so the master toldl mo-in Cauptain Drnry's sailing direc- tions, keeping the Ninspinl on with the end of Paratntni. Thme hands wrere on deck, the ropes manmned f'or shortening sail, the co~mmnodore, commasnder, and master on the bridge; leadsnmen ini both chains . spare tillerahuipped, with relieving tatckles hiooked, amid six men staitioned; gratings and hatchlway covers wvere placed ready for battening down. II The wind S.W. to ?? force 5 toO6, with occasional t' xslight squalls ; high water at 12.20. As we Approachied the nt .t bar there %s as nothing mnore to see, in the shape oftole'j or C Ix sea on, than I lied been led to expect. TIhe, signial from the I n p'lo, station hadl'been flying since 11.30 a.xn., I'Take the g le ba; the Commodore and master were very attentive with o d the Chart on the bridge, and very particular in tile steerage I of the ship, and in their orders to, the engine, room, to keep .A x- the steam at Command, the signal officer 'and signtolinan It s- oil the look out.. At about 1.30 she touched slightly- J g in the after part, ivhen the Commodore gave the order, tII .Y 'Give her all the steam you can," At about 1.40 the a' Is ship struck forward; order given, 'Astern full spsed;' ui a. but the engine or Screw never moved. At the same time Es xe the commodore ordered, ' Hands shorten sail.' The ship Ill ,r broached to, with her head to the northward, Ilm'ching b .y heavily to port, thle rollers setting in from the westwardl, Nv it which'hirumediately made a clean sweep, of the upper deck, Ws tolking covay port quarter boats (second cotter, And jolly af boat), netting, and bulwarki. Sail was shortened as, far as it possible, the men not heing able to keep the deck ; imnine- ;e diately the ship took the ground the lhctchways were bat- xe tenod down, which, hoeepoe erfectly useless, AS Al the fastenings were thonuibnh uping of the ship. iv is The commodore the oerdteptgusobeho wn overboard (we succeddi beigte shpo orcc ?? guns), and the starbadctetobmnedndler, i d thle payranster and secretary to place in e i rvt 0' Ld signals, the public records, and te ship's ok;btfo ai le the heavy lurching of the ship temen SCee nbe o A. pass all the books they wvanted; some were lost overboard. IV Mr. Fielding had orders to land what he bad got and re. ti it turn. After great difficulty the cutter got 'clear of the IC )p ship. She was reported to beswamnped two oi'three times. di ch When seen on one occasion five hands were observed to be W In missing. It was About this time a steamer wee seen, hi cCI coining out of the Heads. The commnodore next ordered ti Y the Pike 'Hands out boats,' yards end stays havinur pre. Nv viously been triced up. The pinnace wvas the first boat ri out. As I was returning from the insintop Coimumader Inm as Burton ordered me into the pinnace to go to the satmrbosrd wv a-t gangway, and on my telling him that I had seen the in [it cotter all right when on thle main yard he ordered mne Al is to take Air. Amrphlett, paymaster, who was well ac- ti xn. queiiited wvith the place oin Shore, for this pui'pose of A( is getting assistance. .Mr. Amplilett was then anid there GI it told tojumnp into the hoeat; this ivas at 2830. We shoved Io so oil, and with great difficulty, from thle strong ebb, cleared' ili ii. the Ship. As we procetfded I observed the smokce of at P ie Steamier to the southward, going seawvard. After a two iv is hours' pull against a heavy rolling sea, we wleared the a ,Ih Ninepin, when. I spoke Mr. Wing in~ the pilot boat. We Ali it learnit from him that the steamer Iin sight (now seen coming gi )f up the South Channel) was the Wovya TWocigc, returning NV ;-to the Heads, that he had no boat to send to thle Has'rier s b. to report our distress, that there was A. lifeboat hauled up If oin Shore, but no hands or means to get her afloat; it 1~ idl would take 12 maei a considerable time. The cutter nosy SC !(d caine up witho us; Mir. Whing anid his Maieries came into cc At the phiinace, while Mria. Aiuplmlett, two sick men, and two Mi it boys, and two others started off' in thle whaler of the iii it Jlan'cier. GI a. Wle pushed on to the stecuier-, nowv between this Heads, cc a. waving, signalizing, cud making ,every effort to gain liar sW :h; attention; after- sonic delay she turnedl rouind and closedii ie us, tak~ing pinnace and critter in tow, proceeding to the 0 le wreck, which we reached at (i pam. I found heer very~ much l 3e lying over to port, the massts all standing, the cretv iii the S: I- i'iggirng above the tops, the sea At times swseaphig as high t ha as the futtock iigging, the sails had been cut away from cc C' the yards, it being impossible to furl them. Takiimg, in ad. ciI dition, this pilot's boat Craw, four young Maories, ivithi the At pinnace being to windward of this wreck, we dropped me dlown to about 30 or,40 yards on ]leiar starboard bowy, hailed C, my the men onl the, bowspm'it cuid jibboorn to jump off' and in in Swim for it. I picked lip seven or eight; having drifted. 01 ie to leeward, the steamer cnime and towed. me to wivindwvard .tli Id I dropped dowvn a secoiid time wyith the cutter iii company. V it This time three or four muore man were takem. Iin in thre ie pinnace. and thme boatswain aiid four or five in the cuttemr. at It was nowv about sevein o'clock; the flood tide had made, V it the rollers seeon became vary high and dangerous on the G my change; the jilbboom broke off short by tke cap); it was B JI quite impossible, with safety to thme boats, to remain anly Ci y, longer by this ireck. As I was going back I shouted to in of the wreck to mnake a ia tepbtnne would D Id venture, in TislTe steamer picked up boats and anchored close to thle B, A0 north side of the South Spit; distant from wreck about B. ig thi'ee-quarters of a miile. This wiis at eight o'clock., At In .n 8 30 the masts wexit. Boats returned to the wreck. Thre iul, If'nga Wonga kept burmiing blue lights, blowing liar ii nsteam whistle, and ringing liar bell. The piniisce picked U, up six or eight, and returmied to the steamer with one or fri *n two in thielast stage of'exhiaustioni. On again nearing  the th 1~ wreck I found the ship completely himoken up. It ives a beautiful clear moonlighit night, Anid masses of the wvreck INi ' kopt pasng in wvith time fl ooh, ?? to whi ch Lieuten a nt Pi '0Yo.ge`:and six or eight men were saved. The cutter got re, so fair to leeward that she made for the land, the pinnace returning to the steamer. We remained on declc the 5whole of the night, keelming A. sharp look~out, At day. it, light imothing could be seen of the ill-fated Orpikects but a lO1 stumip of one mast and at few ribs. a. ! From thme commencement and durilig the whole proceed- d ings nothing could exceed the coolness and decision of .e Commodore Burnett, o.n.. this commander, and thme officers, all in their stations, sentri!es on the spirit moom and Store ci rooms; avhile thle good feeling and steadiness of the men di was beyond all praise, remlaining At their poets puntil ot' Y ordei'ad by the comnmodome to mount the j-igging. Many were washied overboard in obeying orders, i C I must not forget to mention the gallant coiiduct of thre WI t. Kacri crew; they wvere first and foi'emost in Saving lives. mits! a On going aishore inl the cuitter Mr. bult and Mr. Barkl, I. ad d (inidshipmene) ware picked up, one Maori taking Mr. Onl B~arkly oin his back and Carrying himi along thle beach to if his liut. They afterwards gave theii food and put them by a, in their owen beds for the night. mmml Williamn Johnson (captain iof the inizentop) three times thi jumped out of time pinnace with at rope to the rescue, end tic was the means of saving three drowning men.as Onl hoard the Il~ontlai 7Yomga, Which officers rind men lbe. reached cold and naked, time greatest kindness and bospi- re. tality ware showvn and contlinued by all oii board, until we were troisferred to the Avonc, whbere I lied reported An myself to you. ba1 - I have the hionour to be, Sir-, your obedient Servant, L. Lieutenant Her Majiesty's ship Or'phiemus. e 1"

LIST OF SURVIVORS

.S. I Officers.-Lieuteniant Charles Hill, Lieuteinint Dulue D. e Younge, Mr. E. A. Ainplilett (paymaster), Mr. Bhernal ?? Fiedn mdhpmn'y). Mr. C. (3eerX" Hunt (inid"ipm~an), T ?? H. M. Barkley (miidshipmian:', Mr. WV. Mason (boats. l~wain), anid Mr. ,Jamess Beer ((carpenter).I ISeamnen.-Robert Carpentem', W~illis m Fishier, W'illiaml AV. Jobjusomm, Geo~rge Turtle, Charles Weir, WV. Cooper. WV. plii Chews, Alfred Pilbearrm, Samuel Baiinister. Noah I-Vehls, Lo John Quiinton, James Parsons, Heiiry Waulker. Johin liv Nicholson, .Joseph .Torden, George Rlaherts, William tic Itussell, Jlames .Suramei's, Henry Holmnes, Janmes 'Iaylor, vec, George Ward, James lKenniedy, Wlilliam nLanigrisb, Williamii n Pasiii, Patrick Daley, Ed%'ard 1Priggs, Arthur Tilly,tl Tl'omoas 'Sinedden, George Seal, Charles Fox, Thomas o' Burton, William Ollert, ,William Ball, Henry Graham, telc Josep ?? Portbury, Jaimes J. Brown, James adi Wilon, Thomas1 Herblert, John Coclirane, Alfred Aulcatt, Cal H enry~ Bematelh, 1{enry Brow-a. Frederick Bu ttter (belong- ta rI' ng to Hartrier), Henry .Stuffle, Janies Graham, John SaI CFinnis, Ediward Walsh, Williaum Mayes, Henry Newman, ohi Thomats Rusgell, George Young, John jHall, Joh ~im'y fr'o William Gemiry, .Taines Sparsliott, George Hurhestoe mi Iiclicai~dRoee mnairmie), Joseph Cr~oweon ?? WNilim thin Herliert (hey second class), Jolii Ideson (boy), William Hoirigani (commnissioner a servant), picked uip at one A o'clock on the 8th by aI coastei' off' Peeponigi.on List of Men left bselifiid at Sydney.-Sergeant Carter tlii (Royal Maorines), George Monday (guinner Royal Mam'ine w Artillery), Stephen Hedge (private Royal Marines), George hlc Tarpler (boy first climes), James Ashawood (hey first elass),po Thomas Roes (ablobodied seaman), William Barnies (boy ob 'I first cass). il frtcas.CHARLES HILL, Th Lieutenant Her Majiesty's ship Orchllmsv." Z 

The Ne Zealeander says:-" The siiip fell off biondside of to me iollers, the sea knockcing Away leiar sternmpest, port mao buhlc'arlcs, anid boatis, anld incghinga clean Sweep ovei' all. ap, Thle Wind was fr'oii shout S.W. to ?? a stiff' biseze, Tli 1with occasional puff's. Iii this dismalt plight Comimodore use Burnett, iwhose cooneiiss and ilacisioi ivere the theme of sil admiration ismong Isis officers and meii, gave ordeis to Ili. but Fielding, miclsiipinan, to take it cutter wvith the records, svli ship's books, and other articles; but, on losing sight of of hex', earing rhmit she was Siwamped, thle pirnnacic was got sup out en, wth ieuitenant Hill and Mr. Amnplilett,pa- i master', was despatchied to her assistimnee, with ixcetrue- tions to push oii towards time heads, in the vain hope of cjhtainin~mr~ilief through White's lifeboat, knuown to bie stationed there, but, alas, without a, crew to launch or to toc mani her. It was an awful moment, but it is gratifyingng to know that even in this extremity all hands, officers and I men, spoke in praise of each other, and of their gallaxt chief, whooexpressedadeterilrininatioic to be the last to quit the wsreck. After the pinnace had left the launch was got over the side, withi 40 men, to hay out anchors, in the hope ' or nakilig ?? fast to haul into smooth ssater. The1 ebb tide unhappily swept her under tie bows, w!here she est w.as stove, and nearly all on board, including Lieutenant Go' ;Jekyll, wsere drosvned. lbe pinnace meanwhile ?? her course towards the heads, descrying the steamer bri . Fonga Wonga, outward bound for Wellington; the BaM anxiety was imtense, as the Wonga WXouga went round and round, and nearly out of sight. Mr. Aniphlett at length succeeded in reachixg tme pilot-boat, and came up with 9 ,hierl'r ijesty's sbip Hoarwier at half-past ten p.m. 'T'he Ru Monmgcc Wonganneiored, and the few survivors weretrans. Aol formed to her from the boats of the Orp'heus that had been ger got afloat. Had White's lifeboat been able to be launched u3n and iimanned, we are informed, upon good asithority, that del most o'ftheeseanmen mightiave been saved. ''1he heavy guns "T broke adrift ahmoirt half-past 5 p.mn., tearing up thme upper- II rdeck, and driving tme pseople to ?? tops, time rollers un becoming loncer mind heavier. 'lie inte stood dinly mime I untilthie foolatile made, at abouthbalf-pnet 6psla. They ani I then began to go, and thme shinp harted in imalves, the be] moliere breakcing into thistops. Whentbtimexiste wenitthe us; creiv gas's three cheers, as if taking farewell of life. Corn- mao a miodi'e, Bunrnett mind time yonmmg gemitlemnen were ia thre Inca mizeln-top ; ll perished. except Mr. lmarlmcy, son of the rae Governor of Victoria. Commander Bu'ton, Mr. Strong, ehic siimgmimer acid Lieutenamnt Mudncge, whmo wvere hi At tme in-top, ss'ome lost. Tlhce men sw'ho wi're lsiiiecl sue- airl enedled imi gettiicg downa the jib-stay ucr to the jibi-booin, this ?? ni'M thenceimmtosmmocl crtrs'mm hywr be] h)leihtill u. MImc11y of' timel riso' re bdl vondc, laiy hccving loge cinchcimshrei md bodis brbruis d Wsclsa murcimicochn Icy I lie lulls inde talin spr.Aceiatohs from to S. ?? Sullivan, Hex', ajsyssilZc''ieir, syhichc 1mw, isis rc'ceivv'il Oci Sacturday ci ihmgiifrmriech his thi Excelleiccy the (Governor of this disastrosms event. W ith Ge al the utmost promptitude the military authorities tfook ie measures to render every possible ?? or Gamble, Quartermnster-General; D.A.C.G. Chislett, Mr. I le Hanmley, Ordnance Department, with six ainliulanee wag- I lie gone, tents, 500 blankets, and other requisites, setting th out for Onehunga. 'rlre steamer Avon, in charge of Mr. l ;e Hunt, with Captain Jenkins. Her Majesty's ship L P Mir'anda, started yesterday at 2 a.n. On reaching the a in headsnot a vestige of wvreck to be seei. Thle Wonac ly Wosvga, which was on her way to Onehlunga, out meeting a r, the Avon, transferred the rescued seamen to that vessel, I ho and proceeded on her southern voyage. The Hearrier get o ' under weigh on Sunday at ?? but, having grounded, n ae had to wait the flood tide, and did not get fairly away a ip until nearly 3 p.m., about which hour  the Aeon had got It ig back. The Avon went at once alongside the Onehunga e I wharf, and every care and attention were paid to the a k: wounded." ly c as Extract of a Letter from a Midshipman belonging to ft e. Her Majesty'slateShip Orpheres, dated Suez, April 2:- n t- "lhave sentyou two newspapers containing a rough t is account of the wreck. They speak of young Barliy's M p. miraculous escape, but mine was quite as munch so. After b *n we all took to thre rigging I was in the maintop with the si ar commander, first lieutenant, the master, and a midshipmal - d, named Broughton, and about 80 men. It was about nine o e o'clock when the mainmast went, taking with it the fore P a and minzen topmasts. The sea at the time was very high, tf to some of the waves being about 40ft. The mast fell to wind- ti d. ward, and every one with it. As we all rose up we gave we e. three 'farewell cheers' to the remaining fellows in the u oe fbre and mizen tops, and then they werc washed off by . 3s. dozens, till only four remained. Every minute the sea ae washed some yards above our heads, and our logs would nl n he hi thenir. We knewthatif we let goit wouldlbo a case; rd twice my strength failed me, but the receding waves D. washed me back again. T was holding on the futtock l tt rigging of the tel), which was at last washed with the sc ar mast across the ship, and afterwards at clipping wave ir 'd washed me clear of the ship and carried thle remaining n te mast away, breaking the ship up entirely. We were te nbout tbree-end-a-lialf miles from the shore, and the flood c. tide was setting in. I had almost sunk when I cante of across a capsten bar; it was something to rest one's-self te on, I thought, but it was no go, for the breakcers brought a S d lot of the wreck on the top of ;ue, nud I got some thunder- I d ing good clippers on the head, so I swainl to thr shore c7 a Presently I saw a poor fellow oit the top of something tI ro whicl tuirned out to be a chest of drawers, going along at " te a fine rate aid turning somersaults; but li held on well qi re and began to shout, and I saw in tlte direction lie was p1 ig going one of our boats, the cutter, rise on the top of a w g wave. U'ell, you tuay be snre I.did not keep my nionth fc er shut, and soon after 1 was piclted up regulairly (lonc for. PI p Wre vwere about two miles front the ship. Wc went to the YP it Maori pilot's lut, and having dried our clothes and hid cl v some tea. and bread we lay down on a coat or arytlling we bo could get hold of, and slept. Most of the men were not m to much hurt, but I was much bruised and had a sprained yt te ankle. Some went on the beach to look out in cie:s aty c one was washed ashore. Earlv next morning tire steamner 3 a, nme for us, and we, whom they hrud given up for lost al Di were of course haiied wvith delight. Wec Irad to stetm. of d nbout 18 miles to Oneltanga, where we were met by Sir mI te George Grey and a large paety. Barkly and I stopped at D h liis house for a clay and night, till the J~iranda sailedl for w te Sydney to catch the mail. Really I could not have been Pr t treated more Miltdly at bonae, &c. I lost all my kit, of al a course, except an old shirt and trousers which I had on." am te SYMfPfATHY W*ITII RELATIATS OF TIHE DROWNED. tIL 1d At a meeting of officers held at the Royal Naval 01 !d College, Portsmouth. on the 14th April, 1803, for pro. el mnoting a stbscr'ptioma for ?? relief of the widows, el orphans, &c., of all those who perished in the Orphievs, off P( . ?? coast of New Zealand on the 7th February, 1863; tl YViee Admiral Sir' Michael Seymour, G.C., in the Chair, : e It was resolved,-- se " That the following should compose a committee, viz.:-fil a, Vice Adiriral Sir Miiclhael Seymour, ?? Rear Admiral di e George Elliot, Captain IIon. G. F. Hest ings, C.e., Captain H is E. S. Hewlett, c.a,, Captain L. E. H. Somerset, Colonel v y Commandanit G. I. A. Ayles, eLI., Colonel Corn- dc o muandant H. C. Tatear.s., Inspector General of Hospitals sn d D. Dens, f.D., C.m., Commander Wm. Menzies, Corn- Pr mander T. L. Ward, Thromns Brown, Esq., Chief Engineer, or e Brevet Major H. B. Roberts, ?? W.D. Jeans, Esq.C;B., Tic t R.N., ReY. E. S. I'helps, ii.w., with power to add to their to .t nuruber-(H. F. Kirkham, Hon. Sec.) to be called the to . 'Orpheus Subscription Committee,' and that the above le r members, togethere with tre bankers and agents in thle H d United Kingdom, be requested to receive donations tf r from a charitable public in aid of the sufferers caused by o the calamity. a That the parties expecting to participate in the fund th k will st'rte their cases to the clergyman, or minister of the W( t parish in which they reside, or a magistrate, and they are w t requested to adopt the following forme, and forwnrd the TI e same to the secretary for the decision of the committee. WI Ie . nme of applicant. IP. 2. Occupation. hr a 3. Residence, 4. Name and ratihg of deceased. u . . Relacion of applicant to deceased. tl f 6. What family. hi 7. Present means of living. to e 8. When lest received pay or allotment. o n 9. If certified and considered art object for relief or 'IT I otherwise by -." ye y The hbove gentlemen are also solicited to make inquiry of into the correctness of the stntements they receive and od e wven the cormtittee determhie on affording pecuniary vi assistance, that such clergyman, or' ru-gistrate will kindly adriinister it, in suel mranrer aS tir ?? atypoit 10 out. 10 o 'rihe present officers propose adopting the plan arranged wi aby fornner cormrrittees' (Avenlger atrrd B3irlkenhead), in I reanagimig the dispesal of tire funds they may collect, and 20 S they 0ill also be happy to become themedium of distribu- 20 tioni of such mnoney as may he collected by other clritable ui associaltions, as they have every r easor to believe they will al abe able to obtain tire best inlform~ation r'elatmng' to tire hin relatives of tire sufferers. I Subscriptions to be paid to ilessrs Glyn, Halifuix, Mills, it 1 and Co., London; Messrs. Grant, Gillmnan, ntd Co., th barulers, Portsmouth; or by Post Office order to Captaiu le L. E. H. Somerset, rA... president of commnittac, Royal di Naval College, Portsnrouth. nre be 

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001365/18630418/106/0008

Portsmouth Times and Naval Gazette
 Saturday 18 April 1863

p8

(From the Zealander, Feb. 9.) Yesterday (Sunday) morning, at early hour, the habitants Auckland were horrified by the intelligence that .Her Majesty’s ship Orpheus, for some time bark expected on this station, had been totally wrecked attempting to cross the bar, and with the awful loss of 185 souls out of a ship’s company mastering 25G officers, seaman, boys, and marines. The Orpheus (a fine new corvette of 21 guns, 1,706 tons, 400-horse power), sailed from Sydney the 31at of January, and after a fair passage, under canvas, fetched the land off Manukau heads on Saturday, at noon. The ship was at that time under all plain sail, and within eight miles the entrance, the signal flying at Paratutai—** Take the bar”—Commodore Burnett and the master being at that time on the bridge. Steam was got up once, the commodore determining logo in. The lead was kept going; sharp look out was observed, the ship steering east until one p.m., and then north-east east, the Ninepin rock on with Paratutai, being accordance with Drury’s sailing directions in the New Zealand Pilot. At twenty minutes past one the ship bumped slightly, but still went ahead. At half-past one, however, she struck hard, and orders were given to back astern full speed. The engines never moved. The ship fell off broadside to the rollers, the sea knocking away her sternpoat, port bulwarks, and boats, and making a clean sweep over all. The wind was from about S.W. to W.S.W., stiff breeze, with occasional puff’s. In this dismal plight Commodore Burnett, whose coolness and decision were the theme of admiration among his officers and men, gave orders to Mr. Fielding, midshipman, to take a cutler with the records, ship’s books, and other articles but, on losing sight of her, fearing that she was swamped, the pinnace was got out, and, with Lieutenant Uill and Mr. Amphlett, paymaster, was despatched to her assistance, with instructions to push on towards the heads, the vain hope of obtaining relief through White’s lifeboat, known be stationed there, but, alas, without a crew to launch or to man her. It was an awful moment, but it is gratifying to know that this extremity all hands, officer? and men, spoke in praise of each other, and their gallant chief, who expressed a determination to be the last to quit the wreck. After the pinnace bad left the launch was got over the side, with 40 men lay out anchors, in the hope of making grappliogs fast to haul into smooth water. The ebb tide unhappily swept her under the bows, where she was stove, and nearly all on board, including Lieutenant Jekyll, were drowned. The pinnace meanwhile continued her course towards the heads, descrying the steamer Wonga Wonga, outward bound for Wellington the anxiety was intense, as the Wonga went round and round, and nearly out of sight. Mr. Amphlett at length succeeded in reaching the pilotboat, and came up with Her Majesty’s ship Harrier at half-past 10 p.m. The Wonga anchored, and the few survivors were transferred to her from the boats of the Orpheus that bad been got afloat. Had White’s lifeboat been able be launched and manned, we are informed, upon good authority, that most of the ill-starred seamen might have been saved. The heavy guns broke adrift about half-past five p.m., tearing up the upperdeck, and driving the people to the tops, the rollers becoming longer and heavier. The musts stood firmly until the flood tide made, at about half-past 6 p.m. They then began to go, and the ship parted halves, the rollers breaking into the tops. When the masts went the crew gave three cheers, as if taking farewell of life. Commodore Burnett and the young gentlemen were in the mixen-top; all perished, except Mr. Barkly, son of the Governor of Victoria. Commander Burton, Mr. Strong, sailing-master, and Lieutenant Mudgc, who were in the main-top, were lost. The men who were saved succeeded in getting down the jib-stay on to the jib-boom, dropping from thence into smooth water, where they were picked up. Many of the survivors are badly wounded, hiving legs and arras broken, and bodies bruised and maimed by the guns and falling spars, A despatch from Commander Sullivan. Her Majesty s ship Harrier, which was received on Saturday at midnight, informed his Excellency the Governor this disastrous event. With the utmost promptitude the military authorities took measures to retider every possible assistance—Colonel Gamble, Quartermaster-General; A. C. G. Chislett, Mr. Hamley, Ordnance Department, with six ambulance waggons, tents, 500 blanket - *, and other | requisites, sett ing out for Or.ehunga. The steamer Avon, in charge of Mr. Hunt, with Captain Jenkins, Her Majesty’s "ship Miranda, started yesterday at two a.in. reaching the heads not a vestige of wreck was to be seen. The Wonga, which was on her way to Onehunga, meeting the Avon, transferred the rescued seam. .. to that resael, and proceeded her southern voyage. The Harrier got under weigh on Sunday at lour a.ra-, but, having grounded, had to wait the flood tide, and did not get fairly away until nearly three p.ra., about which hour the Avon had got back. The Avon went at once alongside the Onehunga wharf, and every care and attention were paid to the wounded. (From the Wellington Spectator, reb. 12.) The Wonga Wonga sailed from the Onehunga wharf, Manukau, the inst. On arriving at the bar she noticed a vessel the offing, apparently a man-of-war, but the signal being up take the south channel the Wonga proceeded on her course. On getting well clear of the channel. Captain Renner noticed the vessel to bo labouring very heavily, and apparently ashore. Captain Kenner then proceeded the outer entrance of the north channel, bat being unable to take it, on account of the heavy sea on the bar, be returned to the pilot station by the south channel. reaching the pilot station he found two hosts, the pinnace and cutter, belonging the ill-tsled vessel. The pilot then went on board the Wonga, took the two boats tow, and proceeded to the seen* of the disaster. arriving there found that the sea was making a complete breach over the vessel, and sho was, of course, labouring very heavily. then found it was impossible get alongside with the boats, in consequence of the heavy sea; the boats were therefore pulled as close possible under the jibboora. and the officers in charge of them called the crew to jump into the water and they would pick them up, it was the only chance left of saving their lives. Several of the men jumped into the water and were picked up by the boats, but some were unfortunately drowned in the surf by the drawback. At this stage of the proceedings the scene was most appalling, the only chance of the crew getting saved being to jump into the boiling surf. All the men at this time were clinging to the rigging. The was steaming close possible the scene of the wreck, and was fearfully tossed about by the tnmnltnona sea. The boats then returned the Wonga, having succeeded picking up about 14 of the drowning men, several of whom were nearly exhausted, and every means was adopted to restore animation, by the application of hot blankets and other remedies. Several who were wounded and very ranch bruised had their wounds dressed, and every possible attention shown them. The boats in charge the second lieutenant again gallantly put off to the wreck. this time it was becoming dark, and the pilot, not deeming it prudent for the Wonga to remain the position she was then in, proceeded a short distance into the channel and anchored. At about nine o’clock, night being very dark, the foremast went the board, casting all the poor fellows who were clinging to it in the raging billows. Immediately after, the main and mizen masts fell over the side, carrying the last of the crew with them. During all this time most superhuman exertions were being made by the second lieutenant and the gallant crews to rescue his unfortunate shipmates. The two boats, and a boat belonging to the Wonga, were pulling about amid the breakers until past midnight. All hopes of saving any more lives having vanished, the pinnace in charge of the second lieutenant, returned, with several more of the unfortunate crew, to the Wonga, and the cut ter proceeded into the pilot station, being unable to fetch the Wongs, and landed seven more of the crew in safety, including the son of Sir Henry Barkly, the Governor of Victoria, who was saved after clinging to spar for upwards of two hours. The Wongsf burnt blue lights, and showed other signals until daylight, hopes of picking up any more of the unfortunate crew who might floating about the wreck. daylight, the Wonga proceeded towards the wreck, but by this time very small portion of the ill-fated vessel was to be seen. Commander Jenkins returned thanks to Captain Renner, his officers, and the crew of the for their praiseworthy exertions and unremitting kindness to the sufferers. One of the captains of the mizentop, who was one of the boat’s crew, gallantly jumped overboard three times, and each occasion succeeded in saving shipmate from watery grave. The Commodore was last seen the mixen rigging, and is supposed have been killed the falling of a spar. The wind was a'»out W.S.W., with terrific sea on, when the Orpheus wont to pieces. Extract of letter from Midshipman belonging to Her Majesty’s late Ship Orphans, dated Suez, April 2 : I have sent you two newspapers containing a rough account of the wreck. They speak of young Barkly’s miraculous escape, but mine was quite as much so. After we all took to the rigging I was in the muiotep with the commander, first lieutenant, the master, and a midship* man named Broughton, and about 80 men. It was about 9 o'clock when the mainmast went, taking with it the fore and raizen topmasts. The sea at the time was very high, some of the waves being about 10 ft. The mast tell to windward, and every one with it. we all rose up we gave three * farewell cheers’ the remaining fellows in the fore and roizen tops, and then they were washed off, by dozens, till only four remained. Every minute the sea washed tome yards above our heads, and our legs would be in the air. knew that if we let it would be a case; twice strength failed me, hut the receding wa*e washed back again. 1 was holding on to the futtock rigging of the top, which was last washed with the mast acress the ship, and afterwards clipping wave washed me clear of the ship and carried the remaining mast away, breaking the ship up entirely. We were about three and a-half miles from the shore, the flood tide was getting in. I had almost sunk when I came across capstan bar; was something to rest thought, but it was no go, for the breakers brought lot of toe wreck on the top of me, and I got some thundering good clippers on the head, I swam for the shore. Presently saw poor fellow the top of something which turned out to a chest of drawers, going along fine rats and turning summersaults ; but he held well and began shout, and 1 saw the direction he was going, one of our boats, the cutter, rise on the top of wave. Well, you may be sure 1 did not keep mouth shat, and soon after was picked regularly done for. We were about two miles from the ship. We went to the Maori pilot’s but and having dried our clothes, and had some tea and bread, we lay down on a coat or anything could get hold of, and slept. Most of the nun were not much hurt, but I was much bruised and had sprained ankle. Some went on the beach to look out in case any one was wathud ashore. Early next morning the steamer came for us, and we, whom they had given up for lost, were course hailed with delight. We had to steam about IS miles toOuehanga, where wore met Sir George Grey and a large party. Barkly and I stopped at bis house for day and night till the Miranda sailed for Sydney to catch the mail. Really I could not have been treated more kindly at home, &c. lost all kit of course, except old shirt and trousers 1 had on.” 


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001365/18630418/075/0004


Portsmouth Times and Naval Gazette
Saturday 18 April 1863

p4

LOCAL INTELLIGENCE

At a meeting of officers held the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, luesday, for promoting subscription for the relief of the widows, orphans, Ac., of those who perished in Hie Orpheus, oft* the coast of New Zealand on the Till b., Vico Admiral Sir Michael Seymour, G.C.H., in the chair, —it was resolved That the following sliouid compose committee, viz. .—Vies Admiral Sir Michael Seymour 0.C.H., Rear-Admiral George KUiot, Captain lion. G. F. Hastings, C.H., Captain K. S. Hewlett. C.H., Captain L. K. H. Somerset, Colonel G. I. A. Ayles, K.M.L.1., Colonel Commandant 11, Tale, R.M.A., Inspector General of Hospitals 1). M.D., C.H., Commander Win. Mcnziss. Commander T. Ward, Thomas Hrown Ksq., Chief Kngineer, Brevet Major B. Rjberts, 11.M.A , I). Jems. INq.. C.8., U.N.'. Rev. K. Phelps, . (H. F. Kirkham, Hon S e.), nith power to add to their number—to called Orpheus, Subscription Committee,’ and that the above uum'oers, together witli the bankers and agents in  thelTiit.d* Kingdom, requested to receive donations from a cb.uitable public in aid of the sulferers caused the calamity. That the parties expecting to participate in the fund will stale their cases the clergyman, or minister the parish jw which they reside, ora magistrate, and they are requested to adopt following form, and forward the same the secretary for the decision of tho committee 1. Name of applicant; 2. Occupation; 3. Residence; I. Name and rating of deceased ; 5. Relation of applicant to deceased; r>. What family; 7. Present means of living; 8. When last received pay allotment; 'J. If certified and considered an object for relief or otherwise ——The above gentlemen are also solicited make inquiry into the correctness of the statement a they receive, ami whan the committee determine on affording pecuniary assistance, that such clergyman, or magistrate, will kindly administer it, in such manner as the committee may point out. The Committee propose adopting the plan arranged former committees in managing disposal the funds they collect, and they will also happy to become the medium of distribution such money as may other charitable associations, as they have every reason believe they will able to obtain the best information relating to the relatives of the •offerers.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001365/18630425/067/0004

Portsmouth Times and Naval Gazette
Saturday 25 April 1863
p4

THE LOSS OF THE ORPHEUS

We believe a courtmartial will set on Monday next, on board the Victory, I for the trial of the surviving officer of the Orpheus, Lieutenant Hill, and some of the crew of that ill-fated vessel, and to enquire into the circumstances attending the loss.


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001365/18630425/091/0008

Portsmouth Times and Naval Gazette
 Saturday 25 April 1863

p8

THE WRECK OF H.M.S. ORPHEUS.

r.«iw;...viiig despatch, a, ted tin 9th. addressed the Duse of Newcastle, has been received from Sir O. Grey, Governor New Zealand : •• M. Lord Duke, have the honour I report to your Grace the !.-t .1 naa of Her Majesty’s ahipOrpheua on the bar the hi-’ car of Hanukau, ti.c weat coast of the t’a Islsii 1. airly opposite the harbour of Auckland, which is toe eon coast. .... ■uTk-’r-* 01 men Iwv.- weetl from the wreck. I-' un-.nes of the officers who h«»e hcun saved ,lven the eaclwsure this despatch, iw'eiitythree jffieers 158 men. is believed have perished, , , . * . n.ir. ii pieces, :nul nothing lias lieid. The names the missing officers ere ■us. iv.-n i.i the list transmit Led herewith. .. 1 . i i.i.ivcly known that many these officers all ,l isheti.t hey were killed the presence of llMSsnrvlv rs -pure and ropes. There » hat slight i.* .iuy of thorn can save; they cun oiay have having been fir*t woahccl out to sea some S p. ir * lucts bouie other pari oi the -- h* far 1 c.»d collect, was rather the southward ol the port, and was. at about halt-past o’clock the day, with beautiful weather imr wind, ra -' the harbour under steam and sail, going out 12 'S. Kuuoing ftoui the southward, she was intending make the passage across the bar n* M down .a-’ chart Since that lime the bar has shilled about three-quarters mile the northward. She was bus ralher more than that distance too the sout ’tva. d, and touched lirst small shoal oil the middle b-.nka, and few minutes ran directly them, where there always very heavy sea. and where her position (about four miles out sen) was hope 0« 5 \*. between four five o’clock small coasting rtkm'cr, tl, wir.cu out tluharl-oui i •.■r ;wril. w«ut to iior . trom iiJ.lvv'»f« anil bronkers, was unablo get ver.v ior ■ u. tin- boats ol' ti.u Orpheus, and those tV... mei f . were saved under the shelter the steam, r, mana-.d from time time to others. I'he.v were ■ the most gallnut and deiei mined manner by three from the pilot-station, aim sleere.l lae boats. , . *. 6 The ctmduct of Commodore Uuruett, his officers, and men, was perfectl heroic. I have never heard ; stances of greater courage, carelestmes. sell, . efforts to save Ihe Blip and others than have been detailed to me. At about nine night the tn.imm i went vrrboard ; the other two masts went m less lhan tweiu .rules afterwards. Tboae of the erew they mun'oer) who had not yet washed over -ard killed spare and ropes were the masts an.! rigging, and the poor fello.va, aa the.-e vrem, g li.ree parting e'.ners ami thou perished. 1 to.d (I ; - ant nnirunir cry was heard Irora liie wounded dvne. ami yel the of some of their deaths was • noble, .lllogeti'er it is one the mo.s offecfmg events that have e.cr heard of, yet one that cxeile. admiration from the courage, f-devot.mn ami energetic resignation both of many who perished and the few who were saved. I have, Ac., ** li. GliI.T, <• Hia • :hc of Newojstl*. K.i>. .- ■ii Sleuat Journal.) 1, ;.3VO the of of Her Aliii .‘»V .hi,: . lor tiu-y are well iiuiinwl end cfficifiitiv vMjit: fioif the; are generally extricateil from dlrfu-: hot "hen > casuaity'loei tiieij place to ship "ar it ir 100 frequently oceompamell street loan V life, e* the «■**>“ «• the Koyel Oeorge, tire lilrkenhea.!, n«d now ‘friiheus. it must ex..n • 0.. Uiacipliuo er.ll . .. courage l..:.r ■ m-us „f Her Mujetl/s ships the hour tiuiieor jrnrl imminent death. This obedience , ; c... characteristic tire iititish sartoty ' profeesinn. Tltr- fmdieua was arrow errf. . -foe, 1.706 tonr, and power; She a vwa ant), though . classed as corvette, eqr. died it. ivnnege oar liue-oi-bettle ships of '■u:io. Site - from Sydney toe dial Jan -y . i! the coast Zet land the t bo. Fein uary, i-uviag made the rr... from Sooth Wales r canvas. When about eight miles from the Ur Mr.;.r.lr;iu steam wee gd in two boilrn. Wot. lid! one of lift from the wreck, reports that ••ll,e ship proceeded 12.3U, under plain sail, with starboard rat sludstril set, towards Mantuan, steering ii. till one then N.X.Z., berag the courses laid ,-sj the Mas told me—hi Cnpin.n Drury’s sailing rKre.li.nis. keeping the himepm with the end of Paratutai. I'ne Hands ware dec.’, the ropes nir.oned for shortening aail, the commodore, emomen ier, nndmaatcr the bridac, leatlsmen l»th chains, spare idler snipped, with relieving lack'., s hooked, and six men stationed; gratings and hatchway covers were placed read) tor battening .rvn.” The ship was made sec--.' this mttuuer because the heavy rollers tiie bar ■ Manukau break board ships entering the Port, and unices precautions are taken the decks lire apt to ire swep-, ami theses find their way below. The wind nt t:.. lime was 6.W. toS.S.W.. withoccastcual squills, and tiie signal wasfiving, "Take the bar.” tin went the Orpheus, all right. till 1.30, when she touched ground bj the ste.-ti. A. 1.40 the ship struck forward, Ine order was giveu. Aatern full speed,” but tiie engines screw never moved. Wiiar took place it best described by Idcutenant Hill, who soys Tire ship broached re, with her bead the no. ...ward, lurching hear.lv port, ’.iie lers setting Iron the westward, which imm.idiaic'.y made a clean sweep the upper deck, king away port quarter-boat* (second cutter and jolly-beat), netting, and bulwark. _ Sail was shortened far as ’possible, the men not being able keep the deck; immediately the ship took tiro grcntid the hatchways were ‘battened down, which, however, pnveil perfectly the fastenings v. ore thro vh up tlie bunv, the aldp.” Guns were thr wn aver board, m. I other measures taken light.m. ship and briuK her head round, but to no pur 'in. Tu« steamer it appears, the lime this calamity, was outward bound from Maoukau to Wellington, and the Master, observing the sign distress, endeavoured to reach the Orpheus, but four hours elapsed before «be arrived render assistance. This explained tb difficulty of taking the bar consequence of the heavy sea. There was a lifeboat (White’s) stationed the heads, bat crew nl hand to man her. Could this boat have been launched and manned, U thought many officers and crew might have lieen saved. The heavy nuns broke adrift about half-past five p.m., tearing up the upper deck, and driving the people the tops, too rollers becoming longer and heavier. The masts stood firmly until the flood tide made, about half-past six p.m. hey then began t-. go, and the ship parted in halves, the rollers breaking into the tops. heu the masts wen? the crew gave throe cheers, ns if taking farewell Of life. The of this fine ship said to be attributable to the shifting of the sandbanks at the mouth of the barb ur In relation to this Captain Jenkins, H.M.S. Miranda, write** to the Admiralty : —“Mr. Wing, Pilot, and charge the signal station at the Manukao, informed me that the wreck of the Orpheus is precisely on the hearings laid down in Captain Drury’s chart and sailing direct'r n», since the publication of which the middle hanks and small shoal on which the ship first touched have shifted bodily and considerably to the north.” Whether the officers of the Orpheus were cognisant of these changes on the bar is not stated, but Mr. Crosbie Ward, I'oetmaster-Oeneral of New Zealand, England, writing a contemporary, says: is quite true that since the publication of the first edition of the New Zealand Pilot and the charts of that eoast the Admiralty, important change has taken place the shifting of spits which border the channel to the northward- Hot this fact whs known, not only on tiie coast, but universally. Amended instructions appear in the Pilot published at the end of 1861, taken from the yen' Zealand Government Gazette. the charts since that date note calling attention the change in the channel, and, consequently, in the -ailing directions.’ Carelessness ou the part of the Colonial authorities or the Hydrographic-office has not, wherefore, been cause of this sad calamity. the ship took no pilot, and was navigated the directions laid down in the New Zealand Pilot, or coasting book and this hook did not eontain the latest changes, the wreck the Orpheus may be charged to false instructiont. Mr. C. Ward may allege that the shifting of the shoals was not only known on the coast, but universally, though if it were not communicated to those in command of the Orpheus, they could not be held to be aware of these changes, which endangers all vessels making the harbour of Manuka*, and, in this instance, has wrecked noble ship and drowned 185 of her crew. A courtmartini will, no doubt, be held on the loss of the corvette, may then elicited what charts and books were supplied her for the navigation of the coast of New Zealand, which her offers were sent "iS the Orpheoe Wen « peldle et«mer. it i. probeble might have got over the bar aafely. The moment , .trike, .he injure, the atempoet and karin*. the propeller, ao that her machinery 1. n.elem. i. the .nrf.icc. it i« not ao liable to acreiv ha. Wo" »■<> •ui iaaue t..-reck. Screw, .index either counter are « likely to be diwbled. TEETH. REGULAR PROFESSIONAL ATTENDANCE. Messrs. GABRIEL have made arrangements to VISIT iva under;— FAKKIIAM—Kv nltemite Monday, Mr. Arnold*#, jewcuor Higtutrev March 16th ami imh, April and 2ith May and :'*th, June and 22nd. PORTSMOUTH -Kvcry Tudbndat, at 116, High-street. SOUTH AM PT< Monday, at the Hamilton Bazaar, 54, Kvery Tcbsijit, at Mr. Rogers’, perfumer Oticen- CHICHK-S 1 -Every W*di»K9dat, atB7, East-street. 