# The Raising of the Eurydice


---


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002271/18780720/051/0007
Cumberland & Westmorland Herald
Saturday 20 July 1878
p7

TO DO

THE RAISING OF THE EURYDICE.

Attempts to raise her Majesty's ship Eurydice, lying in the English Channel, off the southern extremity of the Isle of Wight, have at length eventuated in a successful scheme. She was lying in 60ft. of water, and embedded in 111 ft of mud, in which oho was gradually settling down. The alterations on the last plan have been few and simple. Wire hawsers were substituted for two chant so that the arrangements were in the following manor : The sterns of the Wave and the Swan, sad two smaller vessels, which ley &CMS the Eurydice beamwise, pointed towards Culver Oliff somewhat, while the larger vessels, the Pearl and Rinaldo. stood alongside them on the outside, pointing in the opposite direction. The two smaller vowels were each attached to the wreck by means of two toggles, the Rinaldo by two toggles and two j, wel moss, and the Pearl by four jewel roper, sit crossed in such '. manner ac to give the utmost resisting power. The wire hawsers used upon the Weaseled the Swan were both of 7in. diameter, while on the Rinaldo and tie Pearl, there ware two of 7in. and two of Sul. The work carried oat during the last fortnight had been of a very somplicatsd and troublesome character, from the fast that the rope and hawsers on board the four needs feria a very soaping series of interstices ; and whoa *gropes had to be let go a fortnight sins be mesa of the failure of the szpartheats, one mass enmeshment ensued. The ropes' ends flew in all disunion§ sad the deck of the larydies became soaksien dont However, the entangled a...re the air bag, ambulated to palms a lifting wine 'readjusted. aad wwirylluag was was the week of eight or aim days, tha time takes ia perfeeming a overlaid. It may be hers stated that Airbag the lard two er three months the craft have had to be detached from the work and seat into harbour on 'ocean of the iarlasneacy of the weather no than thirties' times. It medico decided to take advantage of the uprises gained by the last szperiosat, which was pertilly rendered useless by the severe weather that pomaded, and honed of essemsasiag to pass. inn the vessels at half tide, to the bid as comesient Ether the the naval satharieees at aireageossat was made fee carry* eat the ashes., so 400 or 600 seen having bees told anthem H.M.S. Duke of Wallington, the Asia. Readiest, sad operations were remand the **does in the morning, when the tide was skeet food. The tide rime at this part about tea fast, Tarrying from day to day one or two Math so that there was no possibility of lifting her out of the hole in which she was embedded by mane of the tide only. When the tide was about flood the whole of the ninth were pumped into until they were sank to the depth required ; 924 tons of water were pumped into the Pearl until, with a depth in her held of ten feet, she was sunk Ave fast six inches. The Rinaldo was made to held 600 tom, with an internal depth of nine fest, and snored Ave feet ; while the Wave and the Swan were immersed three fat sex Molest by means of 100 tons of water in sash. When the wrack was lathe taut with these boats, and the water was pumped in thew, the amount they had been sank, added to the amount of the rise of ticie, gave a greater lift than the depth of the bole. When the tide hal ebbed divers were sat down to see that everything was mzure ; they reported most favourably, and as soon as the tide began aisle to flow steam Are-engines and steam tugs were set to pump out the water in the gunman, the body of water in them varying from 190 to A% tom. The only fear now was as to whether such a strain would or would not pull the lituydiees to pieces, but as the buoyany, in consequence of the' pumps pumping out the boats, and the tide increased, the wreck came up gradually. It was intended to have employed the turret - ship Thunderer as a tug as soon as the Eurydice was suspended in the water so as to have towed her with the gunboats attached to shallow r water. Sts steamed round about waiting for her opportunity. bat in so doing she swept across the tide and loot her abler and gear. This aseessitated some delay, inasmuch as it took up valuable thus creeping for the hawsers. One was speedily recovered, but it required the work of a diver to find the other. The second, however, was to have been diepeassd with, aad a rope hamar substituted, but jest as the Thuaderer was te aming towards the scene of the operations her capstan fell overboard. carrying with it the line. In order to aseartain, thanker, if the wreck was freed it was decided to haul in the hareem, so as to draw the arena with the flow of the tide, slackening those that had kept them stationary. This experiment proved in every way successful, and the Eurydice was lifted out of the hole, conveyed some 150 or 180 feet in the water, and deposited on a bard bottom'. o =ations will now become daily until the vessel is d 

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780629/018/0004
Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 29 June 1878
p4-5

THE EURYDICE.

There is to be a final effort made to-day to raise the Eurydice, and if that fails we should fancy the best thing would be to let her stop where she is, a huge coffin for the hundreds of brave fellows who still remain in her. So long a time has elapsed, so fearfully decomposed must be the bodies, that one cannot help asking what the raising of the vessel would do now, and if we consulted our own private inclination we would far rather that the ill-fated vessel remained at the bottom of the sea. What would they do with the ship if they recovered her ? She could never be sent to sea again. Who would care to stop in such a charnel house. We, of course, are not superstitious, but if ever a vessel had dismal associations connected with her, it is the unfortunate Eurydice. Who could stay in a vessel which had been the coffin of 300 or 400 men ? On sanitary grounds, too, it would be bad. She must be by this time sodden with water and the decomposing particles of the unfortunate crew. The sight that will greet the eyes of those who raise her would be horrible, and although we svmpathise with the desire of those who wish to give their relatives decent Christian burial, it should be remembered that it will be impossible to recognise the bodies, except by the marks on their clothing. We do not, however, believe it is possible to raise the ship if it were we do not see what good would be done, and we think the best thing now is not to waste any more money in the farce of trying to raise her. Already more money has been spent than the value of the ship, and to fritter away any more in the fruitless attempts is useless. We notice that the member for the Island, Mr. BAILLIE COCHRANE, entertained the same view, and advocates fixing a buoy over the wreck "as a memorial of the gallant men who lost their lives in their country's service." Another member advocates asking for tenders from outside persons willing to undertake the raising of the ship. We do not imagine that many would care to tender now. Had such a course been adopted directly after the accident occurred, no doubt there would have been tenders offered. Doubtless the company which took the Alpheta off Bembridge ledge would have been successful. There would have been something worth working for, but not now, when the ship is nothing better than a huge sodden charnel house, useless, and only capable of perpetuating mournful reminiscences. The Admiralty refused the preferred help, but there would have been no disgrace in their accepting the assistance of such a reputable firm as are the company who won back the Alpheta to usefulness. The dockyard people study how to I make ships, not how to raise them when sunk, and there would have been no disgrace if the Admiralty had handed over the job to those who have special knowledge and special appliances. As it is, the public have passed through several stages. First hopeful, next doubtful, and finally despairing, because they see that the raising of the vessel is no longer a necessity, but would now be tantamount to failure. It was desirable to raise the ship two mouths ago, but not now.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780629/034/0006

Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 29 June 1878
p6
THE EURYDICE.

TO DO 

The salvage operations at the wreck have made considerable progress, favoured by a continumoe of fine weather. During the week the divers have been engaged in cutting away such running gear an would be likely to drag on the ground when the ship is raised. The Eurydice has been swept with four eight-inch steel hawsers, and heavy toggles, with double wire strops, have been introduced into the ports. To these strops 1 ] inch chain pendants have i been shackled on, and when the lift is given the ends j of these will be in the mooring lighters. In addition I to the eight-iucb wire ropes, the bight of an eight- inch wire rope has been dropped before the main- j mast into the gangway ports, and the ends passed aft under each quarter have been centred or feid.iled under the stern, and will be taken in by tho Pearl In addition to her eight-inch hawsers, the Rinuldo will have the two fore ends of the eight-inch hawser. The Wave and Swan are ready for their work, and these two ships will take in as many of the toggle- pendants as the ships will ride over, and all the ships will previously have been sunk three or four f^et by allowing that amount of water in them, which will be discharged by powerful steam pumps so soon as the ships have been hove down to the wreck. The Popoff air bag has been placed on the wea:her side in the gangway and successfully inflated, and the divers have carefully inspected all the toggles and hawsers now they are iv position, and report th»*n_ to be fixed satisfactorily. On Saturday a beautiful ! inkstand belonging to Captain Hare was recovered by one of the divers, and also a signal log, two white ! ensigns, and an Italian ensign, all four being unser- viceable. On Saturday evening the whole of the divers, riggers, and camber men were brought iv from the wreck, having succeeded in completing the necessary preliminary arrangements. To-day (Satur- day) 400 hands will be taken out to the wreck for tho purpose of tightening up the gear and fixing the purchases, and on Monday or Tuesday next, when the tides will have increased upwards of two feet in rise, the first lift will be made. Sluuld the operators succeed in getting the ship out of the hele in which she lies embedded, the lifting vessels, which will be in the first instance placed across the wreck and immersed some two feet, so as to secure an ad- ditional rise as the water is pumped out, will then be fastened alongside, and the process repeated until the ports of the Eurydice have been brought above the water level. On Saturday the County Coroner held an inquest at Haslar Naval Hospital on the bodies of Charle-i Newbury, gunnery instructor, and Joseph Curtis'., corporal of Marines, both of Gosport. Mr. E. J. Harvey, Admiralty Law Agent at Portsmouth, watched the proceedings on behalf of the Admiralty. The bodies were in a terribly advanced state of de- ?? Coroner explained that he had decided not to re-open the matter, but the Registrar had refused a certificate, and the bodies could not be interred without this or a warrant from himself, and he could not give one without holding an inquisition. Consequently an inquiry was necessary to allow Christian burial to be accorded to the deceased He pointed out that a clergyman could bury without a certificate or a warrant, provided it whs not a sus- i picious death, and was reported within seven days jto the Registrar.— Mr. Harvey said that he had no j doubt instructions to that effect would be given to the Hospital Chaplain.— Two witnesses were then examined, George Carter, labourer, proving the ar- rival of the bodies at Haslar, and giving a descrip- | tion of the clothes they had on, and Benjamin Cud- diford, able-bodied seaman, one of the survivors, identifying the deceased. — The jury returned a ver- dict to the effect that the deceased were dr iwned by the capdzing of H.M.S. Eurydice, and the interment took place in the afternoon. — We understand that as more bodies are recovered from the wreck, they will be identified after being brought ashore, under the direction of an officer appoiutel by the Admi- ralty, and will be buried without any further inves- tigation. In the House of Commons, ou Monday, Mr. Baillie Cochrane asked the First Lord of the Admiralty whether, as it seemed impossible to raise the Eurydice, it would not be better to place a buoy over the place where she lies, with some memorial of the gallant men who perished there— Mr. W.ll. Smith : It is not considered to be impossible to raise the ship, and further attempts will be made to do so next spring tides, if the weather permits. To place a buoy over the wreck permanently would be a seri- ous obstruction to navigation (hear, hear). — Captain Pirn asked the First Lord of the Admiralty whether, as it appears that the Eurydice cannot be raised by the means at the disposal of the Admiralty, he would invite tenders from parties willing to contract with the Admiralty to raise and deliver the Eurydice afloat in Portsmouth harb-ur —Mr. W. H. Smith thought it undesirable to answer the questiou con- tingently. He might say he had no present inten- tion of inviting tenders— Mr. I). J. Jenkins asked the First Lord of the Admiralty when it was in- tended to hold a naval inquiry into the loss of Her Majesty's ship Eurydice; how it proposed that the Court should be constituted ; whether he had con- sidered if it would be advantageous to the public service that one or two experts, other than officers in Her Majesty's Navy, should form part of tha*, Court; and whethor he could inform the House what weight of ballast was put on board when that ship was last commissioned, and of what it consisted ; whether the water in tanks or any portion of the stores was r-iied upon to iisure her stability ; and, if so, what was the naturo and weight of such stores. —Mr. W. H. Smith : A court-martial in accordance with the Naval Discipline Act has been ordered to assembh to inquire iuto the loss of the Eurydice, and the meeting of the Court is ouly deferred in ex- pectation of obtaining some valuable evidence of the condition of the ship before she sank. The law d ie» not admit of experts being placed on the Court but the Court has power to call before it any porsu-i whom in their judgment they think it desirable to give evidence. The weight of ballast was 30 tons of iron pig ballast, the same as she carried on all former commissions The : last part of the second questiou will be a subject of inquiry by the Cou't. 

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780704/089/0005

Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 04 July 1878
p5

THE EURYDICE FAILURE TO LIFT THE SHIP.

In accordance with the programme settled by Admiral Superintendent the Hon. F. A. C. Foley, in connection with the attempt to raise the Eurydice, which it was hoped might be made on Monday morning. The riggers and divers proceeded to the wreck as early as three o'clock on Saturday morning, and the Pearl corvette, and the gunboats Swan and Wave, having been towed out to join the Rinaldo, every advantage was taken of the lull to place the lifting vessels into position and attach them by the purchases across the wreck. The Pearl was placed at the stern to receive the ends of the jewel hawsers, the gunboat toggled on either side of the mainmast, the Rinaldo being reserved for the tow jewels to be made fast to. The corvette and small craft were suocesfully lashed down, but on Sunday morning the wind shifted to the south-west, and the heavy lop, which sprang up, caused the Pearl to pitch to such an extent as to cause her nine inch hawser to part, and she had eventually to be eased to prevent her getting wholly loose, nothwithstanding that the violent thunderstorm which ensued had the effect of materially beating down the swell. The gunboats were allowed to remain in position in spite of the long roll which continued during the afternoon, though from the manner in which they struck against the mainmast it might be considered necessary to ease them off. At noon on Sunday the wind, which had been singularly variable, veered round to the north-west, and should it have the effect of moderating the sea it was the intention of Captain Moss to place the Rinaldo in position forward and secure her to the purchases. At three o'clock in the afternoon 90 men from the Asia, under the command of Staff-Commander Parker, and other contingents from the ships in the harbour assembled in the dockyard, where tugs were ready to take them to the wreck for the purpose of heaving round the capstans by which the lifting ships were to be pinned down at early slack on Tuesday morning ; but on Rear-Admiral Foley, who had been out personally superintending the operations, coming on there, the orders were countermanded and they were dismissed. The result was the loss of another day, the first actual lift which was appointed to be made on Monday morning at ten, being postponed until the some time on Tuesday.

There was a slight breeze blowing from the south-east on Monday, but it was not powerful enough to have any effect on the sea, and the glass was rising. The four lifting vessels were moored exactly in the positions where they were wanted to receive the purchases, and Mr. W. B. Robinson (Chief-Constructor), and a staff of officers, were at the wreck superintending the imniersions of the ships by letting in the water. During Monday afternoon the toggle pendants were successfully attached to the gunboats Swan and Wave, and the bow end of the steel hawser made fast to the Rinaldo ready to hove down. The Lord Warden which was to take up the the towing ropes at high water on Tuesday arrived under sail from Portland, and was anchored in Sandown Bay, and there were besides no fewer than six steam tugs to render whatever assistance may be required. Rear-Admiral Foley was present at the operations the whole day, and remained out all night having about 400 employed under him in the final pinning down of the lifting vessels. They commenced work at three o'clock on Tuesday morning, and completed the work of pinning down the Wave and Swan gun-boats and the Pearl and Rinaldo, corvettes, by six o'clock, water ballast having been let into each of the ships so as to subemerge them three feet. The lowest tide was at a quarter to six and the steel wire hawsers and chain cables were hove taut by six o'clock. Half an hour later the work of pumping on the four craft was commenced by four tugs with the addition of two of Merryweather's steam fire engines, on the Pearl and Rinaldo. At this time the wind was blowing moderately from the N. E., and the sea was comparatively calm. The pumping occupied two hours but while it was proproceeding the wind shifted to E N.E. and a heavy swell set in. Shortly after 8 o'clock the force of the wind had so much increased as to interfere consiiderably with the operations, and at the time the after chain of the White Swan, attached to a toggle, snapped, and it was found necessary to slip the other chain in order to save the gunboat. While this was being done the sea became so very choppy that, at twenty minutes to nine o'clock, it was found necessary to use the hawsers. Shortly afterwards, the swell continuing to increase, orders were given for all the hawsers and toggles to be slipped, and Admiral Foley directed the return of the craft into harbour. During the operations the White Swan got her quarter much damaged by colliding with one of the tugs, and a workman sustained some injuries. The operations were directed by Capt. Polkinghorne, Batt and Dathan, under the supervision of Admiral Foley. On Tuesday morning the Commander-in-Chief (Admiral E. G. Fanshawe, C.B.) with Flag-Captain the Hon W C. Carpenter, arrived at the wreck in the Fire Queen. The Medina, gunboat, also brought out a party, including Lord Elphinstone (representing the Admiralty) and the of Athole. In consequence of the unfortunate change in the weather another attempt cannot be made for a fortnight and it is doubtful whether the interval would suffice to make the requisite pteparations.

The *Portsmouth Times* thinks that it is extremely probable that the attempt to raise the vessel will be abandonded.

Another body was picked up at the wreck on Tuesday morning.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780706/037/0008
Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 06 July 1878
p8

ATTEMPT TO RAISE THE EURYDICE.

It was hoped that, with fine weather, the programme arranged by Admiral Superintendent the Hon. A. Foley, assisted by Captains Polkinghorne, Batt, and Dalham, would be attended with success, and that the ill-fated Eurydice would be recovered. It had been arranged that the supreme effort should be made on Monday morning, but the unfavourable weather experienced on Sunday necessitated a day's delay. Monday was occupied in performing preliminary work which had been postponed from the previous day, and up to Monday night everything went on smoothly. Rear-Admiral Foley was present at the operations the whole day, and remained out all night, having about 400 men employed under him in the final pinning down of the lifting vesels. They commenced work at 3 o'clock on Tuesday morning, and completed the work of pinning down the Wave and Swan gunboats and the Pearl and Rinaldo corvettes by 6 o'clock, water ballast having been let into each of the ships so as to submerge them three feet. The lowest tide was at a quarter to 6. and the steel wire hawsers and chain cables were hove taut by 6. Half an hour later the work of pumping out the four craft was commenced by four tugs, with the addition of two of Merryweather's steam fire engines on the Pearl and Rinaldo. At this time the wind was blowing moderately from the north east, and the sea was comparatively calm. The pumping occupied two hours, but while it was proceeding the wind shifted to east-north-east and a heavy swell set in. Shortly after 8 o'clock the force of the wind had so much increased as to interfere considerably with the operations, and at the time the after-chain of the Swan, attached to the boggle, snapped, and it was necessary to slip the other chain in order to save the gunboat. While this was being done, the sea became so choppy that at twenty minutes to 9 it was found requisite to ease the hawsers. Shortly afterwards, the swell continuing to increase, orders were given for all the hawsers and toggles to be slipped, and Admiral Foley directed the return of the craft into harbour. During the proceedings the Swan got her quarter much damaged by collision with one of the tugs, and a workman sustained some injuries. On Tuesday moming the Commander-in-Chief, Admiral E. G. Fanshawe, C B., with Flag Capt. the Hon. W. C. Carpenter, arrived at the wreck in the Fire Queen. The Medina, gunboat, also brought out a party, including Lord Elphinstone, representing the Admiralty, and the Duke of Athole. In consequence of the unfortunate change in the weather, another attempt cannot be made for a fortnight, and it is doubttul whether the interval would suffice to make the requisite preparations. It is thought extremely probable that the attempt to raise the vessel will be abandoned. Another body was picked up at tbe wreck on Tuesday morning. The Lord Warden left the scene of the wreck on Tuesday afternoon, for Portland, and nothing has been done since worth recording.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780718/072/0005
Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 18 July 1878
p5

THE EURYDICE

The wreck of the Eurydice, after being embedded inabout 11ft. of mud, has been raised.

REST OF COLUMN OCR HASN'T WORKED

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780720/031/0006
Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 20 July 1878

p6

TO DO 

THE EURYDICE. THE VESSEL SUCCESSFULLY LIFTED.

Admiral Superintendent the Hon. F. A C. Foley ras engaged at the wreck on Monday, and under is directions the Rinaldo, Pearl, Wave and Sw in, .•hich are to take part iv the lifting of the submerged tall, were placed in position without- any misadven- ure. Tin pinning down of the vessels was contin- icd during the night, and at G o'clock next morning, when low water, th=j operation of lifting was ommenced by the pumping of the water ballast out >f the lifting craft. The Thunderer, turret ship, Uaptaiu J. C. Wilson, arrived off Dunnose, from Portland, to tow the wreck into shallow water. Early on Tues lay morning the locale of the sunken vreck pre-cnted a scene of considerable animation. Hie weather was as tine as could have been wished lor, and a stranger could hardly have supposed ;hat a spot where perfect calm prevailed, the sea jeing quite smooth, had been the scene of a catastro- ohe of such an appalliug character. Admiral Foley End been hard at work during the priveous day, md remained at the wreck during the night, having willing and able coadjutors in Captains Polking- t.orne, Dathan, Batt, and Moss, Mr. W. B. Robinson, __iief constructor at Portsmouth, and Mr. J. Purkis, dockyard foreman. The alterations of the last plan were few and simple. Wire hawsers had been sub- stituted for chains wherever chains had been pre- viously tried. The steras of Wave and Swan, two smaller vessels lay across the Euryd.ce beam wise, pointed towards Culver Cliff somewhat ; while the larger vess-ds, Pearl and Rinaldo, stood alongside of them on the out side, pointing in the opposite direction. The two smaller vessels were each attached to the wreck by means of two toggle », Rinaldo by two toggles and two jewel ropes, and Pearl by four jewel ropes, all crossed in such a manner as to give the utmost resisting power. The wire hawsers used upon Wave and Swan were both of seven-inch diameter, while on Rinaldo and Pearl were two of seven-inch and two of eight-inch. The lifting vessels, Pearl, Rinaldo, Wave, and Swan, with the Popoff air-bag, which is calculated to have a raising power of about 50 tons, were got into position near the wreck on Monday, and at 1 o'clock on Tue>day morning operations were resumed. Previous inves- tigations by the divers had shown that the hull of the Eurydice was imbedded to the exteut of about I lift., and when the work was vesumed on Tuesday morniuir, with every prospect of a continuance of favourable weather, the chief officials were sanguine that, barring unforseen accidents, the wreck would be removed from its cradle. At L o'clock, the tide '-eing about flood, the work of letting water ballast into the craft, which had beeu pinned down in order to submerge them the registered depth, was com- menced : 924 tons of water were pumped into PearJ, until, with a depth in her hold of 10ft. she was sunk oft. 6in. Rmaldo was made to hold 600 tons, with an internal depth of Oft. and external oft. ; while Wave and Swan were immersed 3ft. 6in. by means of 190 tons of water in each. By the time this wa. finished there was rather less than an hour to spare before it was dead low water, an ' in this interval every thing being made indubitably secure, by half-past o every body was waiting for an indication of the turn of the tide. When it had fairly turned the steam fire engines on board Pearl and Rinaldo were set vigorously to work, and wi h the aid of the double hose were pumping the water very fairly, when the experiment proved so success- ful that a steam tug- was sent alongside of each of these two vessels each with double hose to assist. This had been going on for about half an hour, when a tug was sent in between Wave and Swan in order to pump them. The wreck lay in 60f c. of water, and having by this time accumulated so much dead weight, to lift her at once to the surface would have been simply impracticable. The nature of the scheme of rescue, therefore, was. to raise her 10ft. by means of a loft, tide, plus whatever could be gained by the creation of buoyancy and brino-in^ to bear of additional lifting power. Therefore, supposing her to be lifted 1 0ft by the tide and oi u by the buoyancy created by pumping the water ut of the vessels, and so lifting her with th\.i>* f v.° would be a lift of loft., oniy 34ft. mo*- nT* fi™ depth of the hole in which she~w&, ' £ J?,? "J? was accordingly agreed th^ ?? "*D<xt__ea. | t method would be by a serie*^ * ™ l J practicable of every tide poss^W w3 ' ?? fc f in^vantage ment which VWV^ZI: re P e * tm s the e T x Pen- thus hopeA &\in „. f f ?? . on Tuesday. It was brought inta * eighfc or nme da ? s she would be ?? hAvh«.nV Wdter sufficiently shadow to permit Before & ?? into Portsmouth Harbour, the d ; lifting operations fairly commenced oh' ~ f IV *J S another inspection with the special o eject ot ascertaining whether the Popoff air bag was lw * ts place and secure. Having reported favour- ably, the pumping operations were watched with great interest, more especially as the wreck s mast came up at first, simultaneously with the lighters, and ultimately began to gain ot. them considerably. -By 8 o'clock the green seaweed on the wreck's ma*t had gradually become more conspicuous, and showed evident signs of her increasing buoyancy, > and by half-.past 9 the water had been pumped from all the lighters, and Eurydice shook her m*st occasionally, it was then determined to let well alone for the time, and wait for an improvement iv the tide, seeing that the rising water was liftiag the sunken craft so steadily and well. Thunderer was at hand waiting for her opportunity. Unfor- tunately she swept across the tide, and lost her cables and gear. This necessitated some delay, inasmuch as it took up valuable time in creeping for the hawsers. One was speedily recovej«d, but it required the work of a diver to find the- other. The second, however, was to have been dispensed with, and a rope hawser substituted; but as. Thunderer was about steaming towards the scene o£ operations her capstan fell overboard, carrying the Kne. Meauwhile experiments have been going on to test the buoyancy of the wreck. The hawsers facing Culver Cliff were drawii up taut, aacl those at the stern were slackened. This operation was continued for some time, under difficulties, ia being alrao-t im- possible to haul in the bow ropes, in consequence of what appeared to be the immovability of tue wreck. But sud lenly tbe cap.tana on adi the vesst ls worked easily, the wreck was seeifl to move, and the tars cheered lustily. The Thunderer having now be- come useless for all practical purposes for the day, the experiment with the hawsers was continued un- til it was deemed, advisable to send down divers to report the state *>i affairs. They reappeared with the r port that the Eurydice had been shifted out of the hole and moved from 150 to 180 feet, and that she now rested on a solid foundation. The weather continued fine on Wednesday, and the officials worked with a will. The programme, already described, was gone through again, b ing. commenced at 3 a.m., and everythiug went on satis- factorily. By means of water ballast, the 3<.arl and Rinaldo were each submerged 4ft. Gin., and the Swan and Wave 4ft. The lifting commenced at 6 o clock, and at 9 the wreck began to move towards the shore, and it was thought great progress would be made. In consequence of the mishap to the Ihunderer's capstan on Tuesday, the turret ship was not brought mto requisition, but tugs were employed to a sist in towing the moving hull in shore. Alter satisfactory progress had been made a steel wire jewel used in founer experiments, but which had oe n superceded, fouled an anchor, preventing fur- , ther progress for the day, and the wreck was grounded on a bank m 10 fathoms at low water, bein<»- 400 yards nearer land than before. The practical operations commenced on Thursday j at 8 o clock, and the lifting and forward movement I went on most successfully up to 2 o'clock. The ; actual results accomplished are as follows- The j luirydice has been moved forward in un easterly ; direction one mile and four-tenths of a mile She lies with a ,» list " between the Swan and the Wave, with the Rinaldo and the Pearl outside, all closely lashed together by strong hawsers. Her maintop ate out of water, and show unmistakeablc signs of h9r long detention in the " vasty deep," from which m c trust she has now finally parted company. The expectancies as regards further progress are that the next forward movement by to-day's (Friday) tide will be made broadside on to the tide. If to-day* work is as successfully favoured as Thursday's they expect to beach her, and the hope is that, no unto- ward accident occurring, she will be pumped out b\ Sunday, and ready to start for her original destiua . tion— Portsmouth -on Monday next. j Tho present position of the wreck is in a direct hue from the Culvers, leaning slightly in shoreward, about oue mile and a quarter from the Culvers, so | that she must have been moved from the original j scene of the disaster at least a mile and a half. ° The New Family Match Safe for Bryant and May's j Patent Safety Matches, supplies a want that has long | leeni.lt, and will be adopted afonee by all can ful hou.e^ • keepers. It is very ornamental, and contains three dozen b jxes of Bryant and May's Patent. Safety Matches and I three of the metal match cases, and can bo obtained from j any grocer or oilman, filled and titled complete, f'>r 2s. Gd. I It is strong and damp pi oof, and should be f?uad iv every alvr9 rwuii ' 

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780725/057/0005
Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 25 July 1878
p5

THE EURYDICE.

The lifting operations were suspended on Friday for the re-arrangement of the plan hitherto adopted. Iron plates have been manufactured for taking off the rubbing effects on the sides of the sides of the Eurydice, and were taken out of harbour in the afternoon to be fixed in position. On Friday morning at low tides the quarter-davits of the sunken vessel were visible and it was officially ascertained that she was within a mile of the Culver Cliff, entirely out of the tide way, so that she will not be in danger even should the weather take an unfavourable turn It was not expected that the actual lifting of the wreck can be proceeded with before this day, but of every moment was utilised by divers to clear the decks as far as practicable, and they have been busily engaged in preparing to cut away the mainmast. Orders have been issued regulating the steps to be taken for the recovery of valueable property so soon as the ship shall be pumped dry. A lieutenant, two warrant officers, a dockyard detective and a ship's steward have been appointed for this purpose, except for special moans, no persons will be permitted to enter the cabins until search has been made. Particubx attention is to be paid to the recovery of the public chest and of large onus of money believed to be in possession of the ship's corporal and a lieutenant in the itoyal Engineers, who were on board. The Dockyard officials are preparing comparative list of weights carried by the Lurydic . e in her commissions of 1846, 1846 and 1877, and oho descriptive drawings of her angle stability, for the purpose of the tourt-martial. We had hoped to have been able to record the fact that the Eurydice was safe in Portsmouth Harbour at the time of going to press with our present issue, but it seems that a little more delay is necessary. On Monday evening the ehipwirght department of Portsmouth Dockyard finished their part of the work of adapting the Peed, Rinaldo, Wave, and Swan to the new place of lifting the wreck from the sides, 100 men having been engaged upon these vessels throughout Sunday. Much, however, remains to be done in the way of strengthening the sides of the craft with wooden balks, and it is not expected that the necessary preliminaries can be completed before Friday or miturday. The Peral will be located on the port side of the Eurydice, and alongside her, for the purpose of increasing her stability, will be the Swan ; whilst the Rinaldo and the Wave will be similarly platted on the starboard side. The wreck will not, as heretofore, be swept with hawsers, the lift having to be effected entirely by means of 16 toggles, eight being fixed in position on each side, secured by Tin. wire hawsers, each capable of standing a strain equivalent to a hundred tons. Though not altogether out of the tide, the Eurydice is in water that is less in the run of the tide, and this will be highly advantageous in rendering the lifting vessels more manageable than has hitherto been the came. It is intended to lift the Eurydice with successive tides as high tie may be found practicable, then to cloge up her ports and hatchways, and afterwards to pump her dry, when she will flo.tt to W the surface b lt y virtue of her own bouyancy. ith this resu attained the salvage operations will be completed and the wreck will undergo a thorough fumigation before being brought into harbour. On Monday the Manly tug brought a body into harbour, and a chest of drawers and a cashbox were also recovered from the unfortunate frigate.

---



https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780801/064/0005
Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 01 August 1878
p5
THE EURYDICE.

TO DO 

There is now a fair tinc.pect of the Ennalke being taken into harbour. Numbers of visitors tiout ltyile and oilier piaci% h.ive vi4itod the spot to watch the operations, which were swisysifully vnitinoeil hn . .:ounlay, advantage bring taken of the mood. when the weather was decidedly fisinitir.thle...llllolmh the 01011py . . Tlw title 711,, lAA the liftiuß of the Coautuniscra withiu three hours before high loiter. Th.. p imitate , arrangements otteonerwl whisioahly. et.l the Mutant :'-instrinkmdent taxi the dockyard ° lik e n, w ere enabled to keep the wreck dear of a dangerous reef lying hetwem Saidown Fort and h.• Chit by taking her in tow of fear l.ovecu. meet -cram tags The shoreward movetuent was with comparative ease, and when the Eurydice was again grounded it was ascertained that Mlle had leen brought threesixteentlis of a mile, leaving her otbout half a mile off the shore. and toot eutinty out of the tideway, her poeitioh being favourable for another lift at high water. She Inv in 43 feet of water, which is seven joie than the depth of water at low tide at which she lay on the preceding day. With the tternom title an attempt wes suctyssfully male t • put tics Euryttice.m even keel, a. she has up to the pretest time Men inclined on her starboanl tile, at tut angle of 37 degrees. This brought her lumina& netting within six feet of the surface dm water. On Sunday another lift was made. During the operations on Saturday a body floated to the surface, and was brought to Haelar Hospital for interment. Another cargo of coffins laser been cent out of harbour, sad all the necessary preliminaries have been made for recovering the large number of eorpees which are expected to be found between decks. On Sunday the Commander-in-chief returned into harbour nging with him information of a satisfactory character. The Eurydicelying only three edge-lengths team the shore, in 33ft. 1 din. of water at low tide. At halt-past three on Monday morning all the livte og: in went down piasiog two more seven-Itch wires owlet. the ship. The tugs then towed her in, old the Eurydice was brought up in abort 14 feet f water ut low tide, and at about a cable's „ lt! from the shore. Here she will remain. lifting has iu fact been completed, and the Rinaldo end the Pea I have been disconnected from the wrack. This done, the divers were set to work to e"scor the ports on the lee side, which are about t.oree feet below water at low title, a party of .:iirwrighte were sent to cover the ports on the last side, which are now out of water. In the mare of Monday eleven more bodies were discovered. They were found on the main deck, in, .of couree. the most shocking condition. Coffins were 'Newel through the ports, the bodies phased it. them. the outline screwed down, and then passed ..rot again, so that the distressing spectacle was witnessed by us few pardons as possible. Admission to the ship for any bat the working party is strictly prohibited. The primping out having been tootnetel. and the entrance of water prevented, it i. bell reed that the ship will right herself and float. ,eu will that terrible task of expluras tu of the lower deck, on which it is expected that the majority of the missing men. some 250 were assembled when the vessel was capsized, and from width there was uo escape during the minute or two before she foundered. DITIONI AL PAK fICULAIOL-4TATE OF THE WIZ (► The topsides and deck on the port side exhibited a remarkably clean appearance, penlueed, no doubt, by the wash of the tide, :mud it was observed, as tarnishing confirmatory proof of the suddenness of toe catatenaihe, that the ropes connected with the upper sail,. wen., all belayed. °o soon as the ports oti the weather hide came above the water, a volunteer exploring party from the Naval Reserve and two undertakers entered the main deck in search of Nadirs having their mouths and nostrils enveloped in swathes to prevent their inhaling the effluvium. A whyard launch simultaneously brought a cargo of euthua from h Pearl, and, with *covered barge ititendeti for the reception of the coffins, took up - a peition under the fore part on the Aerated side. lie shells were passel into the deck, and eleven Waive, which were 'looting. were quickly recovered, totaued separately, and then towed away in the barge. it °detente being freely used. The locale of t..e wreck was literally swarming with sightseers. who premed round the bull. On the main deck all war chaos, everything being unshipped and floating to the leewat- 'L.. , the bodied were strined of Ile,h mainly I,_ and meted with slime and sand: r.t,ttie were absolutely unrecognisable, but one was identified as a first-class petty officer by hi, badge, and two others were found to he ordinary seamen, Watts and Haver. through their names remaining upon the remnants of clothes ou them. At low water the upper put of the poet bilge was out of water, and a party of ninety sea no. began to clear the upper deck and to float the ..otter and the crew's boat, whilst the Adniiral- Superintendent and luspottor.Getieral Danville managed to penetrate into the captain'a cabin and also the weather chins, but found no bodies in dam. They were unable to pass into the starboard cabins, the water remaining as high as the centre tt the combing of the main hatchway . S. On the pet aide the guns remained in position in the mid. ,hip, port forward, and the port under the main chains, and those the starboard side in the putt before the gangway and tltat abaft the gangway were also visible. PREP AMINO ►OR REMOVAL. The duty of closing the pars was at once consmencesl under the superintendence of Mr. W. B. It,Wilson, Chief Constructor, and M. Froyne, (*.instructor, it being arranged to block them with 2iu. deal, lined an the underside with a coating of fearnought and Russian tallow. The 11-cuttles and hstebways will be similarly closed and made secure. In the course of the afternoon Hicks and the dockvard divers, and Davis, Sutherland, and Thomas, divers from the firm of Messrs. Hie)* and Gorman, w-le sent Wow to cover up the leeports and 'cutlet well as rho stern ports, their exertions twine stimulated by a promise of double pay. The apertures on the weather shit are to be closed and caulked by the dockyard shipwrights. The closing of the wreck is expected to be completed by to-day, after which she will be pumped out, cleaned, and disinfve ed., and then towed into the harbour and moons' in some remote creel. The lower deck, where a large number cf bodies are expected to be foend, ismuct be entered till the ship bas been Boated- On Monday tae dockyard photographer, Mr Loader, took a number of negatives of wreck at different states of the tides for' of the court-martial about to a held , " e P u ri m ' A number of liba- - . 1 men were sent ashore on Mon'lay evening, under orders to return on Tues. day afternoon to relieve thaw on duty. The Pearl and the Swan w re taken into harbour, the latter to ceeive two fire engines for helping to pump out the wreck, which now points N.E. by N. A curious ineTsfeiltO7e;;;e7Ztnesday. Among the otfieers on hoard the Eurydice at the time she foundered was Al& Charles V. Strange, &lieutenant who is said to be the owner of part of the Epsom Raceeou•se. His will has been in the posesasion of hi, friends, but it was believed that there was also a codicil though diligent search has been made, could not be found. Yesterday the codicil was discovered on board. 

---


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780808/114/0005
Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 08 August 1878
p5

THE EURYDICE.

Continuing our narrative of the operations with the wreck of the Eurydice, we have to record a  
THREATENED BREAK UP.

On Thursday evening a gale set in from the east and continued on Friday morning, leading to a further suspension of the salvage operations. The waves broke over the wreck. causing her to oscillate violently, and at daylight it appeared that the hull would be considerably damaged by the high wind and the rough sea. The flow of the water through the ports and down the hatchways quickly began to snap the planks of the upper deck, and a tremendous strain was thrown upon the hull generally, leading to the general apprehension that she would come to pieces. The Rinaldo and a lighter were sent into harbour, and instructions were given for the Pearl to follow, and all the steam tugs were ordered out with all practicable speed to render assistance in recovering bodies and wreckage. Four bodies were picked up from the main deck at low water under considerable difficulties, and two others were washed ashore at Shanklin, while several were reported as floating past Bembridge Point and down the Channel.

The dockyard officials directing the operations did all they possibly could to lessen the extent of the damages to the wreck of the Eurydice, but on Thursday evening the greater part of the upper deck had gone, and if a gale had blown throughout the night the chances were that the hull would have gone to wreck. The dangerous portion of the wreck is thoroughly recognised by the Admiral-Superintendent, the Hon. F. A. C. Foley, and the scientific officials in charge of the operation, no moment has been lost in hermetically fastening up the hull, pumping her out, and clearing her decks.

As might be expected thousands of visitors and residents in various parts of the Island have visited Sandown in order to indulge in a sight of the ill-fated Eurydice, which has been beached about a cable's length from the shore off Redcliffe Bay which is contiguous to the Culvers. There was a rather rough sea running into the bay on Thursday, and on that day the body of a man was washed ashore not far from the beached frigate. The body was in a better state of preservation than some picked up three months ago. The flesh on the hands could be seen, though nearly black, but that of the face had almost entirely disappeared. Under the collar of the poor fellow's serge was stamped "W. Shuker," which is supposed to be the name of the wearer. It was intended to inter the body near those of his comrades lying in Sandown churchyard. There has ben another body washed ashore near Luccombe during the week, and is supposed to be that of an officer, but there is difficulty in indentification. Two more bodies were picked up near Apley on Saturday morning, and interred in Ryde Cemetery in the afternoon. Particulars of the ceremony will be found in our local news. Another was also recovered on Sunday.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780810/030/0008
Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 10 August 1878
p8

THE OPERATIONS AT THE EURYDICE.

After the departure of the Rinaldo on Friday afternoon, the wind increased in violence, and it was found expedient to bring the Pearl and the tugs into the harbour. With the exception of the Grinder, which had on board Lieut. Wonham, who was left in charge of the wreck, the Eurydice was wholly deserted. Happily the wind went round slightly to the north, or the wreck must have gone to pieces. Ou Sunday, though the wind continued to blow freshly from the southward— and thus the least favourable for the resumption of operations— the Pearl was again taken out to Sandown Bay and the tugs were once more on the spot. Admiral Sir Houston Stewart, the Controller of the Navy, and Rear-Admiral Foley, the Superintendent of the of the Dockyard, paid a visit to the scene of the wreck in the morning. Operations were continued on Monday. The six steel hawsers were passed across and under the ship's keel in readiness, divers having been down and inserted toggles in three of the starboard ports. The steel pendants attached were not only useful to assist in lifting the wreck, but were of service in righting the ship to some extent from tho angle at which she heeled over to starboard. On Monday evening the Royal yacht Osborne steamed into Sandown Bay and brought up near the Eurydice. On board were the Prince and Princess of Wales, Prince Albert Victor and Prince George, in the uniforms of naval cadets, and the three little Princesses, with ladies and gentlemen in attendance. One of the Osborne's boats was lowered, and the Prince of Wales in naval uniform, with the captain commanding the Osborne, and other officers and gentlemen, were rowed to the Eurydice. The officers who were in charge of her at the time were Staff-Captain Dathan, Staff-Captain Batt, Commander Moss, and Lieut. Wohnam. His Royal Highness clambered up the side of the wreck, and remained some time in conversation with these officers, taking much interest in their description of what had been accomplished and of their plan for future operations. The captain of H.M.S. Valorious, which has been attending on the other ships in Sandown Bay, was also on the wreck during the Prince's visit. The Osborne steamed out of the bay about 6 o clock on her return to Osborne.

On Wednesday, operations were continued at the wreck of the Eurydice, and the results winch attended than augurs well for the ultimate success of the endeavours to raise the vessel. The wind, which, during the last few days, had persistently blown from a quarter which was least desirable, fell off considerably during Tuesday night, and on Wednesday morning the working party were enabled to proceed with the task which had recently been so frequently delayed by the boisterous weather. The authorities, seeing the exposed position in which the Eurydice was placed in Sandown Bay, had for some time contemplated removing the wreck round the corner of the Isle of Wight, as a temporary measure, so as to be out of the way of the heavy sea which sets in at this point whenever there is stiff breeze blowing, and accordingly on Wednesday operations were resumed with this intent. It was low water about 11 in the morning, and the arrangements for slinging the vessel, the insertion of toggles, and the passing round of hawsers having been accomplished by that time, the lift was commenced as arranged . Previously the Pearl and Rinaldo was secured to tie the Eurydice on either side, and to counterbalance the strain which would be brought to bear upon them when the lift was begun the gunboats Wave and Swan were lashed on the outside of the two ships. As the tide rose the lift was satisfactorily effected, and the two Government tugs Camel and Grinder, which were in readiness, took the wreck and lifting craft in tow. The flotilla was slowly but satisfactorily brought round the corner of the Isle of Wight, and during the afternoon the Eurydice was grounded in St. Helen's Roads, where it was thought to leave her for the present. The vessel is now in 24ft. of water, and when the tide is full low the depth will be reduced about 8ft. more. On Thursday efforts were made to get the wreck sweetened somewhat, as the putrefaction of the bodies on board would render it highly undesirable for the ship to he brought into a place crowded with craft in her present unsanitary condition. After this has been done the wreck will be agaim lifted and towed into Portsmouth Harbour, the idea of pumping her out being now abandoned, in consequence of the ship having been so knocked about during the recent gales.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780815/106/0004
Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 15 August 1878
p4

THE EURYDICE.

Since our last issue the wreck of the Eurydice has been removed from the exposed position in Sundown Bay to more sheltered quarters west of St. Helen's fort. As the tide rose the hull was lifted and taken in tow by the two Government tugs, Camel and Grinder, and the flotilla slowly moved round the corner of the Island, and on Wednesday afternoon the Eurydice was grounded in St. Helen's Roads ; the vessel was in 24 ft. of water, which was reduced about 8ft. at ebb tide. It was then thought desirable to disinfect the wreck, as the putrefaction of the bodies rendered it very undesirable to place the ship among other craft. The idea of pumping out was thought to be impracticable, on account of the injury done to the ship by the gales which had prevailed

INQUIRIES IN PARLIAMENT.

TO DO 

In the House of Commons on Thursday evening Mr. Jenkins called attention to the keg of the Eurydice. His opinion was that when the ship left England she was neither properly ballasted nor provided with sufficient stability to enable her to encounter heavy weather with security. He was not prepared to say that on that account the ship was unseaworthy ; but she was in such a condition as to require the utmost skill in handling her to avoid disaster. He was told on good authority that when the ship was beating out of Stornoway, before her last voyage, her performances under canvas led certain people to predict that, should she encounter any extraordinary weather the result would be disastrous. The ship depended largely for her stability upon the ballast afforded by her consumable dares, which was very unreliable. Her tanks could not have been full when she was lost. He was convinced that no officer of experience was on deck when she was struck by the squall, and if his memory served him rightly nearly all the ships lost to her Majesty's Navy for some years past were lost when they were in charge of junior officers.

After a few words from Colonel Beresford and Mr. Muntz, Mr. A. Egerton said he thought this was hardly an opportune time for raising the question, since in a few days a thorough inquiry would be opened. The ship was as carefully prepared for the service for which she was intended us any ship that ever left the dockyard. She was never regarded as unsafe. The weight of her tanks was 110 tons, and she carried 30 tons of ballast as well. This was the weight she had always carried before. She was not overmasted. Her officers, from the captain downwards, were most carefully selected, and were all men who had had considerable experience. As to the training of lieutenants, it was the custom to give them charge of gunboats and small draft boats before they were promoted to iron ships. It was hoped that in a very short time she would be in harbour, and then a thorough examination, which was no doubt necessary, would take place pending which he deprecated criticism on the conduct of any person on board that ship. 

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780815/118/0005
Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 15 August 1878

p5
VISITORS TO THE EURYDICE.

Among the many who have paid a visit to the wreck of the Eurydice, were the Sunday school teachers and choir of the Congregational Church, Fareham. They were taken by Mr. Joeeph French in his vessel the Wonder, and enjoyed a good tea at Sea View on their way home. 


---


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780815/105/0004
Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 15 August 1878
p4
THE EURYDICE.

Since our last issue the wreck of the Eurydice has been removed from the exposed position in Sundown Bay to more sheltered quarters west of St. Helen's fort. As the tide rose the hull was lifted and taken in tow by the two Government tugs, Camel and Grinder, and the flotilla slowly moved round the corner of the Island, and on Wednesday afternoon the Eurydice was grounded in St. Helen's Roads the vessel was in 24 ft. of water, which was reduced about aft. at ebb tide. It was then thought desirable to disinfect the wreck, as the putrefaction of the bodies rendered it very undesirable to place the ship among other craft. The idea of pumping out was thought to be impracticable, on account of the injury done to the ship by the gales which had prevailed. 


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001857/18780817/011/0003

Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News

Saturday 17 August 1878

p3

A PADDLE BY NIGHT TO THE EURYDICE.

I THINK that amongst the many sad catastrophes of last year there was not one so fearful and so sudden as that of the ill-fated Eurydice. We live in the island, and immediately opposite to the place where she went down, and were the last to see her in her beauty five minutes before she was lost. The day had been tolerably fine and warm, though at times we had a cold gust of wind accompanied by a few flakes of snow. We had had lucheon at Shanklin, and were returning to our house at Sandown, by the Cliff pathway, when we noticed a tremendous storm coming straight from the mainland, at the same time as the Eurydice was just rounding the point, in full sail, and scudding before the wind. Alter remaining for a few minutes to watch her, as the light just caught her sails and made a beautiful picture, my friend exclaimed, "Good Heavens what are they thinking about, not to shorten sail, with such a cloud as that coming up Every other vessel in sight has done so, and there'll be mischief if they carry on like that in the squall." The words were scarcely spoken before the storm was upon us, and we were enveloped in a mist of whirling snow and sleet, and had to cling tightly to the railings to avoid being blown over the Cliff. The storm was so violent that it was impossible to see a yard, and as we had quite enough to do to look after ourselves, we never thought of the ship until we were safely at home and the storm had cleared. Nothing was then to be seen of her, and the natural conclusion was, that she had rounded the Culvers and was safe in Portsmouth Harbour but the next morning the horrible news came, which seemed too dreadful to be true, but on looking through the glass the masts and sails of the vessel were plainly visible, the tide having partially raised her.

Of course everyone is well acquainted with all the exertions that have been made to move her, and the various mishaps that have occurred from bad weather, &c., which prevented her from being transported to where she now lies, until quite lately. She was, on the night of the 28th of July, lying three-quarters of a mile from shore, and just facing Redcliffe. It was very dark, there being no moon, but clear, a breeze springing up, and the stars were bright. I, being passionately fond of canoeing, persuaded my husband and a friend that it would be delightful to paddle round the Eurydice in the evening, and, like most ladies, having eventually got my own way in spite of remonstrances, we set out, having the usual difficulty in supplying my *sposo* with a canoe to fit his portly form. After nearly an hour's easy work, we reached the wreck with only one slight mischance my friend having nearly tipped over one of the numerous hawsers, which, combined with pieces of wreck floating about, made the excursion a dangerous one, as it was too dark to see any small thing on the water and the small waves threw such shadows, that I repeatedly fancied I saw some poor dead face glaring up at me as I passed.

The ship lay completely out of water and presented a most sad and solemn appearance the broken deck, the ropes and chains, &c., hanging about, all looked so huge and grim and black standing out against the sky, with only one small ray of light from the lamp belonging to the man left in charge shining down into that dreadful grave where the corpses of over 200 brave men had found a last resting-place, they were so mingled together that it was impossible for them to be taken out separately, or in any way to identify them.

There was no sound save the rippling of the water, and occasionally the bells on board the tugs about 200 yards off. The water was more luminous than I had ever before seen it, and the phosphoric light came from the canoes and paddles in flashes and lines of fire, which greatly added to the curious weird beauty of the scene.

Having gone round, we returned home, paddling against a very strong tide. The lights of Sandown shining across the water, though a pretty sight, were very confusing, and I very nearly ended the evening and myself as well by all but charging a steam tug, which I did not see till close upon it, and my husband calling out, "Paddle left!" instead of right-- a rather awkward mistake. However, I am thankful to say we reached home, hungry and tired, at eleven o'clock. If anyone wishes to see the Eurydice in her beauty they should go at night, as, in the day the noise and confusion, and the numerous tourists talking and laughing and eating and drinking close to her, jars on the feelings somewhat, and the ship herself looks different when left alone and solitary on the sea. I believe they are going to, or have, moved her again, as she is breaking fast but as we left Sandown two days after our adventure I can add nothing more of my own Knowledge.  
E. L.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780824/008/0005
Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 24 August 1878
p5

The Eurydice.

It is now believed that the last body has been recovered from the ship, and Admiral Foley has officially reported the ship clear of corpses. A thorough investigation was made by Jenkins, the diver, before this opinion was come to. The body of Lieut. Black was discovered jammed against the ladder. The body of a seaman was found in the cells of the lower deck, but not in irons. Since the ship has been off St. Helen's only 15 bodies have been recovered, making the total number recovered since the wreck 121, of which six were found in the sick bay. The number washed out to sea by the strong tide in the direction of France, must therefore have been more than was first supposed. A director of tbe Salvage Steamship Company has written a letter in reply to observations made in the House of Commons, and explained the difficulties of rasing sunken ships, and agreeing that the work done to the Eurydice by the dockyard authorities reflects great credit on them.


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000183/18780826/017/0003


London Evening Standard

Monday 26 August 1878

p3

ROYAL VISIT TO THE EURYDICE.

The wreck of the ill-fated Eurydice, which lies within a cable's length of the fort on Bembridge Ledge, Isle of Wight, to which it was moved from Sandown Bay, was on Saturday evening visited by the King of Denmark, the Prince of Wales, and the two sons of the latter. Shortly after seven o'clock the Thunderer, with the party on board, steamed slowly round the eastern end of the Isle of Wight, and half an hour later she lay to within three-quarters of a mile of the wreck. The Thunderer had proceeded from Cowes to the westward and thence round the island, and she had been delayed in her arrival owing to the priming of her boilers. Admiral Fawnshawe's steam launch went alongside the Thunderer, and the King of Denmark, the Prince of Wales— the latter in the uniform of a captain of the Naval Artillery Reserve — and the two sailor princes in their naval cadets' uniform, embarked. On reaching the wreck, Admiral Foley introduced to the Royal visitors the cheif officials engaged in the raising of the wreck. The  Rotal visitors passed to the upper deck of the wreck, and, climbing to the top of the port side, stood upon some of the 80 tons of iron ballast which is to be used in canting the vessel, Mr. Robinson explaining the method to be adopted in performing the operation, which is fixed for to-morrow (Tuesday ) . A brief visit was paid to the main deck, and on returning the diagrams explanatory of tiie Work about to be performed were shown. A number of questions were put by the King od Denmark and the Prince of Wales in reference to the calamity. The Prince congratulated Admiral Foley and the officers acting with him upon the successful issue, so far, of the operations, and the King of Demark expessed his admiration of the indomitable energy and perserverance which had been exhibited by all concerned. THe Royal party returned in the steam launch of Admral Fanshawe to the Thunderer, which at once steamed to Cowes.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000162/18780828/071/0004
Dundee Courier
Wednesday 28 August 1878
p4

In view of the Eurydice disaster, the Admiralty have issued stringent orders to the effect that training ships for seamen shall in future undergo a careful and special inspection before being commissioned.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002100/18780829/128/0008
Isle of Wight Times
Thursday 29 August 1878
p8

Why Was The Eurydice Not Raised Sooner?

Lord C. Heresford has made a long statement to show why the wreck of the Eurydice was not raised sooner. His lordship shews that there have been seventeen failures to lift the wreck ; and why ? The answer is that the weather was the sole cause. In answer to the suggestion that a private firm shoild have been employed to raise the ship, his lordship says:— "Now as to the point as to whether a private firm could have raised the wreck, which was generally preached as a better and a quicker expedient, the wreck was within 11 miles of the largest and best found dockyard in the world, the Admiralty had at their command not only the Admiral and all his most experienced officials and heads of departments, but everything that could possibly be wanted, both in skill and appliances. The total value of the plant that was use, and without which the Eurydice would be now where she foundered, he made out to be £150.000. There were six tugs, a steam lighter, four lighters, two corvettes, four coal hulks, and 230 men, all under discipline, consisting of fitters, shipwrights, riggers, seamen, engineers, and divers, all working under their different heads of departmeuts under the Admiral. What private firm or six private firms could have placed such a plant on the spot?

Referring to the cause of the disaster, Lord Heresford remarks :— "One word about the loss of the unfortunate ship. It was generally believed that it was caused by want of seamanship. He ventured to say it would have occurred to any man under the circumstances. Captain Hare, poor fellow, was one of the best seamen England had. He was specially picked for his duties on that account ; all the officers were also picked As the ship was under the lee of the land the squall was never seen, else the usual precautions would have been taken, such as letting go sheets and halliards. She was hove at once upon her beam ends, and the men could not get up from the lee scuppers to let go the necessary ropes. A good deal had been said about the lee ports being open and too much sail on the ship. The lee ports were always left open in a smooth sea. It was the weather ports that were closed, as the wash and spray all came from the windward side. Any officer would have cracked on also under the circumstances with a smooth sea and a falling glass, and his port close by. Captain Hare wanted to drop his anchor before the gale came on and before night set in,—instead of beating about all night in such a dangerous locality. He had his own idea as to why the sail was not shortened before. The deck clock was stopped at one minute to four. The ships company were piped to supper at seven bells. They never in the Navy turned the men up in their meal hours. He himself as officer of the watch had lost spars and sails by holding out a few minutes because the men had not finished their time. The men were at supper as would be seen by their mess traps and the tea leaves in the basins, and all the bodies were in their right rig. Captain Hare meant, he believed, to turn the hands up, and shorten sail at four o'clock. The few minutes lost the ship in his opinion. The squall, an awfully heavy one, struck her, and she took a tremendous lot of water over her lee gunwale. It hove her under water. She was going at a great pace, and he believed she sailed to the bottom ; she certainly was moving at a great pace when she struck the bottom, as her false keel was astern of herself on the bottom. He himself saw the bits and belaying pins, and not one single rope was let go. He could assure the hon. member for Penryn that his observations would cause far more pain to the old messmates and shipmates of Captain Hare than he would ever know. He was a splendid seaman, and most considerate to his men, and it was, in a roundabout way, his kindness to them that really prevented him turning the hands up before their time, and so the ship foundered before he could do anything.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18780831/007/0005
Isle of Wight Observer
Saturday 31 August 1878
p5

The Operations at the Wreck of the Eurydice

The operations for heeling the wreck were resumed on Tuesday, and attended with considerable success. The lift was made during the morning, and, aided by the ballast placed on the port side, the wreck was got into an upright position. In the course of moving the vessel, 12 more bodies came to the surface, and were conveyed to Haslar Hospital. The repairs to the starboard side of the wreck will now be proceeded with, and at the conclusion of the work auother attempt will be made to pump her out. We hear, however, that the recent storms have greatly damaged the wreck.

---


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000369/18780831/101/0008
Reading Mercury
Saturday 31 August 1878

p8

The Eurydice.

—On Saturday the Prince of Wales and the King of Denmark visited the wreck of the Eurydice in one of the Royal yachts from Osbrorne. The Port-Admiral and other officials received the party, who made an exploration of the ship, and manifested the greatest interest in the explanations of the arrangements for floating the wreck, and bringing it into harbour. The Eurydice was successfully moved on Tuesday. To get at the leaks on starboard side was necessary to heel her over to port, and to assist in this operation, eighty tons of ballast were placed on a platform built on the port side of the wreck. The starboard side of the hull has sustained a good deal of damage through resting on the fluke of an anchor. In moving the vessel twelve more bodies came to the surface and were brought ashore for burial.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002683/18780903/053/0005
North British Daily Mail

Tuesday 03 September 1878
p5

VISIT TO THE EURYDICE.

The Eurydice, laid up alongside the old hulk Laurel in Porchester Creek, a continuation of Portsmouth Harbour, continues to be the centre of attraction. The wreck, so recently recovered from the deep is, however, zealously guarded by a detachment of marines until the work of clearing out the wreck has been finished. Through the courtesy of Admiral Foley, however, the Central News correspondent was enabled to make as examination of the whole of the ship yesterday afternoon. The entire centre of the upper deck is washed away through the violence of the waves during the time the wreck lay in Sandown Bay. The planks placed crosswise form a means of communication from one part of the upper deck to the other. On going below a scene of confusion presented itself. Most of the gear has been removed from the main deck, and many of the cabin knocked away, but the deck is still littered with the broken spurs and rigging. It is upon the lower deck that the scene is most chaotic. The deck is littered with *debris* from end to end, and the whole covered with a muddy slime several inches deep. Officers chests, men's clothes, bags, beer barrels, bird cages, pickle bottles, surgical cases and instruments which have fallen from the adjacent dispensary, lie upon the deck a heterogeneous and confused mass. Locomotion between decks in consequence of the quantity of mud which has been washed in was extremely difficult. The mainmast, the lower part of which still remains in the ship, was hoisted up out of the vessel, a distance of nearly six feet, by the bumping action to to which the vessel was subjected. The starboard side of the lower deck has also been considerably lifted out owing to the action of the sea. Right aft on the lower deck is situated the bread room, from which a most intolerable stench proceeded from the decomposed bread and other provisions, notwithstanding the fact that the Weeks are continually washed with carbolic acid. The captain's cabin has been entirely removed. On the lower deck are several cells, in one of which a prisoner was found, *minus* his head. The poor fellow was not chained, but another one, at large on the lower deck, was. The irons have been found near the mainmast, but no body. The holds are at present impossible to get down into owing to the fact that all the movable gear near the spot has rolled into them and choked them up. In making room for the suction pipes to go down between the lumber into the hold, the divers came across a body jammed in, and supposed to be that of the breadroom boy. Several articles of uniform clothing were scattered about the lower deck, amongst which is a lieutenant's undress uniform coat. Yesterday the working party came across a skull, but no more bodies. In case the vessel should meet with any untoward accident, anchors have been laid out from her, so that, in case the necessity should arise, she can be immediately hauled up on to the mud. One of the steam engines, got to work periodically, continues to be sufficient to keep the water under. As soon as poesible the work of clearing the ship — a labour of considerable magnitude—will be concluded, and the vessel fumigated and brought into port; but this is not likely to take place for at least a fortnight.

---